<!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER I</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">Winter had come.</p>

<p class="c004">In the first days, it was but trying its strength—wrestling
with the autumn, and howling far away
in the livid distance, like some ravenous monster.</p>

<p class="c004">Now dawned those chilly glacial days, days of dismal
and mournful dejection, lit with a dribbling feeble light;
corpse-like days, when the birds flew away to the woods with
cries of dread, and the waters babbled fearsomely, rolling
sluggishly on, as if palsied by the terror of the cold; and
the very country-side seemed to shudder, and all that was
therein to look in awe towards the north and its unfathomable
depths of clouds.</p>

<p class="c004">As yet the nights were as those in autumn, full of dreary
sighs and soughs; sounds as of struggling, and sudden
hushes; the howl of dogs; the cracking snaps of freezing
timber; the sad voices of shelter-seeking birds; horrible
calls from weird woodlands and crossways, invisible in
the dark; and the beating of eerie wings, and shadows
lurking beneath the walls of the stupefied cottagers.</p>

<p class="c004">At evening, from time to time, the huge crimson bulk of
the setting sun would still peer out of the west, going down
ponderously—a globe of molten iron, whence blood-red
floods would gush forth, with smoke-like pitch-black vapours
rising round them, looking like a grand and gloomy conflagration.</p>

<p class="c004">They said: “The winter is growing harder, and ill winds
will be rising soon.”</p>

<p class="c004">And indeed the winter did grow harder—every day,
every hour, every minute.</p>

<p class="c004">Directly after the fourth of December (the day of St.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_4">4</span>Barbara, patroness of a holy death), the first of the winter
gales began blowing in short whiffling puffs. They skimmed
along the ground, with a baying like that of hounds hot
on a trail. They bit into the ploughed fields, snarled about
the bushes, worried the snow-drifts, tore at the orchard
boughs, swept along the highways, sniffed in the streams;
and here and there, with but little ado, they ruined every
thatch and fence that was in poor condition. After which
they fled, still baying, away to the forest lands; and after
them out of the dusk came the great winds on the very
same evening, their long sharp tongues lolling out of their
wheezy jaws.</p>

<p class="c004">All night they blew, howling across the fields like packs
of famished wolves. They did their work well, too. Ere
morning the stark hardened earth had been quite stripped
of its tattered and scattered covering of snow; only in
places, in hollows and ditches, could a few white rags be
seen on the fences. The fields too had some shiny white
spots left; but the roads lay frozen deep—as it were, petrified—and
the frost had bitten profoundly into the soil with
its keen fangs, so that it resounded with a metallic ring like
iron. But with the morning, the gales fled to hide in the
woods, where they lurked, tremulous and shuddering.</p>

<p class="c004">The sky, too, was now overcast, ever with darker clouds,
which came creeping up out of every cavern, raising heads
of monstrous size, stretching forth long lean flanks, throwing
their grey manes to the winds, baring gigantic discoloured
teeth, and coming on in mighty battalions.—From
the north: black, huge, all shredded and tattered, piled in
tiers, branching out like a score of overthrown forests, one
upon the other, separated by deep chasms, and with—so it
seemed—great streaks scattered over them of greenish ice,
as it were: these rushed forward with wild might and a
dull murmuring sound. From the west: those advanced
slowly—livid, enormously swollen bulks, which in places
shone bright as fire; and they rolled one after another,
more and more persistent in their long advance, not unlike
flocks of great birds. From the east came sailing flattened,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_5">5</span>rusty-hued masses of vapour, monotonously the same, and
forbidding to the eye as mouldering carcasses that drip with
tainted gore. From the south, too, were wafted ancient-looking
clouds, reddish dark in hue, recalling clods of peat,
striped and motley to see, though dingy and dull, as if vermin
burrowed within them. There were also clouds floating
on high, seeming to descend from the pale quenched orb
of the sun, and forming dingy wisps, or spreading out in
manifold tints, as embers that are dying. And they all
came forward, built up mountains of prodigious height,
and concealed all the sky under a black seething flood of
squalor and grime.</p>

<p class="c004">The whole land had suddenly turned to darkness; a dull
silence prevailed on every side; all the lights had grown
dim; the bright eyes of the waters were glazing over; all
beings felt petrified and stood in amazement with bated
breath. Up out of the earth surged the fear of what was
to come; the frost penetrated even to the marrow of the
bones, and every living thing trembled with the terror of
it. They saw the hare running through the village, with
shaggy fur standing fluffy on end; they saw the ravens
alighting with hoarse croaks upon the granaries, and even
entering the houses. Dogs howled wildly outside in the
yard; men sped in fear to take shelter in their huts: while
along the pond the priest’s blind mare went to and fro with
the ruins of the cart, and struck against the fences, and
with a weird cry sought her way back to the stable.</p>

<p class="c004">The darkness began to be continual, murky and exceedingly
depressing; daily the clouds sailed lower; they came
creeping down from the forests, like thick volumes of dust,
and rolled along the fields like floods of turbid water: then,
coming to the village, plunged all things in a dingy ice-cold
fog. And suddenly there would come a rent through
the midst of the sky that shone dark-blue like the azure
mirror of a well: a wild wind whistled through the dim
space, the fogs at once were driven together on either side,
and by the shattered gateway thus made came a first loud
blast, soon followed by another, a score, and hundreds.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_6">6</span>They howled on in troops, they poured forwards in torrents
that nothing could restrain; they rushed along as if
coming out of broken fetters, in raging bellowing multitudes,
striking at the gloom, dispelling it utterly, swallowing
it up or sweeping it away like rotten chaff.</p>

<p class="c004">And out and far over the fields, in screaming turmoil,
was driven the fog as froth before the wind.</p>

<p class="c004">The clouds, trampled down by the feet of the pitiless
storm, fled and rolled off, to skulk in the woodlands and
forests. The sky was swept clean; once more, though
with dull and sullen mien, the day peered forth, and every
creature drew a breath of relief.</p>

<p class="c004">For nearly the whole of Sunday the gales blew on without
any surcease or abatement. In the day-time, they were
not yet quite intolerable; but the nights became beyond
bearing. These fell, bright and starlit, and it was then
that the gales played their most furious pranks. Folks did
not say (as they do when the wind is high): “Sure someone
has hung himself,” but: “Fivescore men must be hanging
now!” What with the howling, the banging, and the
creaking as of a thousand empty wagons dashing at a
gallop over hard-frozen ice, no one could sleep a wink.</p>

<p class="c004">The huts creaked likewise. Often and again did the storm
come driving at the corners, heaving up the thatches, butting
at the doors: sometimes even breaking in the panes so
that they had to get up at night and stop them with
pillows: for it then rushed in with a sound like the squealing
of noisy swine—bringing along with it such fierce cold as
benumbed the inmates under their eiderdown quilts.</p>

<p class="c004">None can say what the villagers suffered, in the course
of those days, of those nights.</p>

<p class="c004">Nor what harm was done abroad. The blasts bore down
the fences, plucked off the thatched roofs, and—at the
Voyt’s—blew down a shed that was all but new. They tore
the roof from Bartek Koziol’s granary, and carried it away
more than a furlong’s distance into the fields; they threw
down the chimney at the Vincioreks’; they wrenched a good
bit of boarding from the mill-roof: and as to the multitudes
<span class="pageno" id="Page_7">7</span>of minor losses, and the many trees uprooted in the
orchards and woods, who can tell them? Why, upon the
highway alone, they tore up and cast across the road about
a score of poplars, that lay like as many murdered and pitilessly
mutilated corpses!</p>

<p class="c004">The oldest inhabitant could not remember when the winds
had been so hostile and done so much injury.</p>

<p class="c004">Folk therefore kept at home, wrangling together beneath
the smoky rafters of their own cabins; for it was no light
matter to show one’s nose round the corner. Some of the
women, however, being less patient, would at times cautiously
step outside their enclosures and visit their gossip-loving
neighbours: ostensibly to spin in company, but in
reality to whet their tongues and give vent to their ill
humour. Meanwhile, the men were threshing stubbornly
on behind the closed granary-doors, and from morning till
late at night the flails smote upon the floor. The frost
had nipped the corn; and so the grain was more readily
threshed out.</p>

<p class="c004">These gales brought with them more and more biting
frosts. With mighty strokes they had frozen all the brooks
and streamlets. The morasses were now solid. Even the
mill-pond was coated over with a sheet of bluish transparent
ice. Only close to the bridge, where the water grew deeper,
was it still in motion: all the rest of its banks were fettered
by the ice, and openings had to be cut for drawing water.</p>

<p class="c004">No change of weather came till St. Lucia’s day.</p>

<p class="c004">Then the frost slackened somewhat; the winds paused to
take breath: they swept the plain more seldom and with
less boisterous fury; the grey sky grew smooth as a well-harrowed
field’s vast hempen-coloured surface, and so low
that it seemed resting on the poplar tree-tops along the
road.</p>

<p class="c004">But presently, after the noonday Angelus, the frost increased
a little and the snow fell in large flakes.</p>

<p class="c004">Dusk then came earlier, and the snow still fell thicker
and thicker, though drier and more powdery, until the
night closed in.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_8">8</span>By morning the snow was three good spans deep; it covered
the whole land like a fleece, veiled it under its own
white expanse, shaded with bluish tints; and still it continued
to fall without intermission.</p>

<p class="c004">And so great a stillness came over the land that no noise,
no sound pierced the masses of down, now floating to the
ground. All had grown silent, dumb: as though, by some
miracle, all things had stopped in awe, listening to the
all but inaudible rustle of the falling flakes, so quietly
floating earthward—a dim flickering whiteness, unceasingly
descending!</p>

<p class="c004">The night was now a whitish obscurity, a glimmering,
pearly, immaculate dawn, like the finest bleached wool on
earth; this glimmering from out of the infinite abyss—as it
were, the frozen shimmer of the light of all stars, condensed
and ground to dust in its downward flight from
heaven—now besprinkled the whole country; and soon the
pine-woods were shrouded, the meadows disappeared, the
highways vanished, and all the village was lost in the silvery
haze and blinding dust, and nothing more was to be
seen but streams of sifted snow, wafted down as still and
smooth and soft as cherry-blossoms in a moonlit night!</p>

<p class="c004">At three paces’ distance, there was no making out either
huts or trees or fences, or any human face; human voices
alone, like butterflies on wearied wings, flitted about in the
nebulous whiteness.</p>

<p class="c004">This went on for two whole days and nights. In the
end, the cabins were all snowed up, and rose, each like
a snow-covered hill, with a long tress of smoke waving
from its top. Roads and fields had become one vast plain:
the orchards were all filled with snow, even above the tops
of the enclosures; the pond had become quite invisible beneath
the avalanche and, in place of the ground, there was
but a pale, flat, impassable, miraculous plain of down.</p>

<p class="c004">The snow fell still, though now more dry and scantier.
At night the stars would twinkle athwart its curtain: by day,
at times, the blue sky would show beyond the whirl of
floating specks and flitters; voices sounded more sonorous
<span class="pageno" id="Page_9">9</span>and came no longer muffled through the veil. The village
seemed to wake up a little, and folk began to stir themselves.
Some even attempted to drive out in sledges, but soon returned,
finding the ways impracticable. Here and there,
they dug paths through the snow from cabin to cabin;
every heart rejoiced. Especially the children were beside
themselves with delight; and dogs rushed about everywhere,
barking, licking the snow, and scampering with the
urchins, who swarmed on to the roadways, clamoured in
the enclosures, shouted, pelted one another with snowballs,
built horrible monsters, and dragged each other about on
toboggans; their joyful cries and merry sports filled all the
place with din. Roch had to give up teaching that day,
for keeping them in the house over their primers was impossible.</p>

<p class="c004">About the third day, the snow ceased as twilight
fell; and though there were still a few flakes, they were like
the shakings out of an empty sack of flour—nothing to
speak of. But the sky was overcast, crows flapped their
wings about the houses and alighted on the roads; the night
came down starless and leaden, its obscurity diminished only
by the whiteness of the frosty snow—and as still as one
shorn of strength to the uttermost.</p>

<p class="c004">“Let but the slightest wind spring up, and we shall have
a snowstorm,” muttered old Bylitsa the next morning, as
he peeped out at the window.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka lit the fire on the hearth, and looked into the passage.
It was early yet: all over the hamlet, the cocks were
crowing. The twilight was still dusky, as if lime and soot
had been mingled and spread over the world; but in the
east there glowed a heap, as it were, of ash-covered embers.</p>

<p class="c004">The cold in the room was so keen, so damp and bitterly
piercing, that Hanka had to put on her clogs in the house
over her bare feet. On the hearth, there was scarce any
fire at all; the green juniper brushwood only crackled and
smoked. Hanka hacked a few chips off a board, poked
some straw under them, and at last got the fire to blaze.</p>

<p class="c004">“Enough snow has fallen for a whole winter,” the old
<span class="pageno" id="Page_10">10</span>man said again, blowing on the window, crusted over with
a thick coating of greenish ice.</p>

<p class="c004">The eldest boy, now entering on his fourth year, began
crying in bed; and from Staho’s lodgings on the other side
of the hut, angry voices, the weeping of children, and the
slamming of doors were heard.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, Veronka is already at her morning prayers!” Antek
remarked satirically, as he wound round his legs the bands
he had previously warmed at the fire.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, well,” the old man mumbled, “she has learned to
talk—and she talks. A little too much perhaps, but she
means no harm.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Means no harm! And does she mean no harm when
she beats her children? Does she mean no harm when she
leads poor Staho a dog’s life, with never a good word for
him?” Thus Hanka made reply, as she knelt down by
the cradle to suckle her little baby, which was crying and
kicking its legs about.</p>

<p class="c004">“Since we came, three Sundays have gone by: not one
day has passed without a quarrel and fighting and curses.
She a woman? No, she’s a brute.... But Staho too is a
mollycoddle, who lets her swinge and cuff him at will. He
works like a horse, and she treats him worse than a dog.”</p>

<p class="c004">The old man cast a deprecating look at Hanka, and was
about to say a word in Veronka’s behalf, when the door
opened and Staho himself, flail on shoulder, peeped in.</p>

<p class="c004">“Antek, will you come and thresh? The organist told me
to get someone for his barley, which is dry and good, and
comes splendidly out of the husk.... Philip begged me
to take him; but if you will, here’s work for you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Thanks kindly,” was Antek’s reply; “but I am not going
to work at the organist’s. Philip will do very well.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Please yourself. Good day.”</p>

<p class="c004">At her husband’s refusal, Hanka had started up; but she
at once bent down, her head over the cradle, to hide the
tears that gushed forth.</p>

<p class="c004">“What! in this fearful winter, so poor that we have only
a few potatoes and salt, and having not a stiver to bless
<span class="pageno" id="Page_11">11</span>himself with ... he refuses work offered! Sits all day
long in the hut, smoking cigarettes and brooding!... Or
else roams and prowls about like one distraught, seeking
... what? The wind perhaps? O my God, my God!”
she sobbed in her distress.... “And now, even Yankel will
trust us no more: and we shall have to sell the cow....
True, it is not beseeming that he should work on another
peasant’s land.... But what—what can we do?—Lord!
were I a man, I would not spare myself nor shirk toil, but
work till my arms dropped.... Alas! poor thing that I
am, what can I do?” And she set about her household
duties, now and then casting a furtive glance at Antek, who
sat close to the hearth, with his eldest son on his lap,
wrapped in his sheepskin, and chafed his little feet with a
hand warmed at the fire, but sighed and stared moodily into
the blaze the while. The old man was peeling potatoes
at the window.</p>

<p class="c004">Silence had arisen between them, disquieting, pregnant
with hidden griefs, and heightened by the stifling sensation
of misery. They would not look into each other’s eyes, nor
talk; their words trailed off into plaints, their smiles faded
and went out; in their looks flamed suppressed reproaches;
in their pallid emaciated faces harsh feelings were to be
read, and their minds burned with bitter resentment. Three
weeks had passed since they had been turned from Boryna’s
door: so many long days and nights, and they had every
detail of the expulsion yet distinct in their memories. The
injury was as fresh as ever, the stubborn sense of revolt as
strong.</p>

<p class="c004">The fire was now burning merrily, and its warmth spread
through the room, till the frost melted on the window-panes,
and the snow in the chinks outside the hut trickled
down in water, while a little moisture oozed from the hard-beaten
floor.</p>

<p class="c004">“Those Jews ... are they coming?” she asked at length.</p>

<p class="c004">“They said they would.”</p>

<p class="c004">And again not one word more. Indeed, who should speak
first? Should Hanka?... She, who durst not open her
<span class="pageno" id="Page_12">12</span>mouth, lest the gall that filled her heart should flow forth
in spite of her!—Or Antek? What had he to say? That
he was miserable? They both knew that. He never had
been prone to make friends; and as to pouring out his heart,
even to his own wife, he had no wish to do that! Besides,
how could he speak, now that his soul was eaten up with
hatred, and every memory made him writhe and clench
his fists in such rage that he would willingly have vented
it upon the whole village!</p>

<p class="c004">He now treasured no longer the sweet recollection of
Yagna, any more than if he had never known her, than if
he never had held in his arms the girl whom he now could
tear in pieces.</p>

<p class="c004">And yet what he felt was not hatred. “Some women”
(thus he thought of her) “are like stray dogs, always ready
to follow anyone who offers a bigger morsel, or shakes a
stick to be obeyed.” Even these thoughts were not very frequent:
in presence of the avalanche of deadly wrongs done
him by his father, he forgot hers. The old man was guilty
of all: yes, it was his father—the villain, the tyrant, the
thorn in his side that ever rankled deeper and more cruelly!—it
was through him—through him!—that all had come
to pass.</p>

<p class="c004">Every evil inflicted, every suffering that he had undergone
in these days, was garnered up in his bosom, and formed
a horrible rosary of pangs and tortures; but he incessantly
told the beads in his mind, that his memory of them might
be fresh.</p>

<p class="c004">Of his poverty he made little account. He was a stalwart
fellow: needed but a roof over his head, and no more.</p>

<p class="c004">“Let my wife,” he thought, “see to the children.”—What
stung him above all the rest was the utter injustice shown
to him. This he felt, continually more inflamed, as the
rubbed sting of a nettle. What! In but three weeks, all
the hamlet had come to look upon him as though he were
an unknown intruder. No one spoke to him, no one looked
in at his door, nobody had even a word of kind greeting for
him. He felt himself an outlaw.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_13">13</span>Well, if they did not come, he was not the man to beg
them. But neither would he hide in a corner—far less
yield an inch of the way to any. If they cared to have
a fight, why, then, let them have it!... But now, why
was all this? Because he had fought his father?—Aha!
was that unheard of in Lipka? Did not Joseph Vahnik
fight his father every other day? Had not Staho Ploshka
broken his father’s leg? And yet no one had a word of
blame for either! No, it was only he they were shocked at.
Of course: “Whom God favours, His saints favour too”;
and Boryna was as a god in Lipka!</p>

<p class="c004">All that time, breathing only revenge and the thought
of it, he had lived on in a fever of excitement. He did not
take to work, lost thought of his poverty, forgot all about
the morrow: broken down after the agony gone through,
he merely crawled hither and thither—a self-tormentor
everywhere. Now and again he would rise in the night,
to go about and roam along the roads or crouch hidden in
dark corners, dreaming of vengeance, and swearing that
he would never forgive.</p>

<p class="c004">They took breakfast together without one word; and he
sat with eyes of bewilderment, ruminating the past—thorny
bitter provender, hard to chew!</p>

<p class="c004">By now the day was getting on, and the fire had gone out.
A cold whitish light from the snows outside shone through
the partly thawed panes: the chilly dismal glare lit up
every nook and showed the room in all its wretched
nakedness.</p>

<p class="c004">Heavens! By the side of such a hut, Boryna’s cabin
was a mansion. Nay, any of his father’s outhouses, even
the cow-byre, was fitter for human abode. It was a foul
sty, not a dwelling-place; a heap of rotted logs, dried dung,
worthless rubbish! Not a single board to cover the bare
ground, whose clay was honeycombed with holes filled up
with frozen mud and sweepings, whence an odour worse
than a manure-heap exhaled whenever the fire-place warmed
the room. Above this quag of a floor rose the walls, warped
and mouldy down which the damp trickled, and in whose
<span class="pageno" id="Page_14">14</span>dark corners the Frost shook his hoary beard: walls
with numberless holes, stopped with clay—or even, in some
places, straw and cow-dung. The low ceiling hung down
like a torn old sieve; there were fewer boards in it than
holes, stopped with bundles of straw. Only the furniture
and household utensils, together with the holy images on the
walls, to some extent concealed this state of dire destitution;
whilst the great press, and the horizontal pole across the
room on which the clothes were hung, hid the wickerwork
partition that separated the room from the byre....</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka soon got through her work, though she had not
to hurry: one cow, a heifer, a young pig and a few geese
and fowls forming all her live stock, and indeed all her
wealth. She dressed the boys, who presently went out into
the passage to play with Veronka’s children; the sound of
their frolics was soon heard. Then she tidied herself up
a little, as she expected the dealers, and would have to go
to the village afterwards.</p>

<p class="c004">She particularly wished to talk the matter of the sale over
with Antek beforehand; but she could not venture to speak
first. He, still sitting by the fire that burned no more, was
staring into the distance with a mien so sombre that it
made her afraid.</p>

<p class="c004">What could it be that ailed him?</p>

<p class="c004">She took off her clogs, lest their clatter might annoy him,
and cast in his direction more and more frequent glances
full of affectionate disquietude.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah,” she thought, “it is harder, far harder for him than
for other men!” and a great desire came over her to question
him, to try and guess his sorrows, and mourn over
them with him. Already she was standing by his side,
ready with words of kindness, welling up from her loving
heart. But then, how could she speak to him, if he paid
no more heed to her than if she were not there? She heaved
a sigh, for her heart was very heavy. Good God! how
much better off so many another woman was—even though
without a roof she could call her own! Should he raise his
voice—nay, even his hand—against her, well, she would at
<span class="pageno" id="Page_15">15</span>least know she had a living man by her side, and not a log
of wood. “But he!... Not a word! Now and then he
growls, as an angry dog would—or looks at me so that my
blood runs cold. I cannot talk with him, nor open my heart
in converse with him at all. A wife—what is that to him?
A pair of hands to tidy the cabin—to cook his food—to
nurse his children! Does he care for me in any wise? ever
caress me, pet me, treat me tenderly, or even chat with
me? All that has no interest for him: he keeps his mind
aloof from all around him, makes himself as a stranger,
and succeeds so well that he sees nothing that goes on. Yes,
let the poor wife bear every burden on her own shoulders:
suffer alone—come and go—trouble about all things: he
will never pay her with one gracious word!”</p>

<p class="c004">She could no longer keep back her tears, the bitter overflow
of her grief, and went out to the byre beyond the partition
wall, where, leaning against the manger, she wept in
silence; but when the cow Krasula, with a deep breath, set
to licking her head and shoulders, she burst out into loud
lamentations.</p>

<p class="c004">“And I shall lose you too, my poor beast!... They
will come.... They are coming.... They will bargain
for you ... and then throw a rope round your horns ...
and lead you off, you that give us our food!” she murmured
low, putting her arm round its neck, and turning with all
the affection of her wounded heart towards this creature
that felt for her.—No, this could go on no longer.—The
cow was to be sold; then there would be nothing for them
to eat!... And he refused to seek work! Had they not
asked him to thresh? and he would not go. He might have
earned one <i>zloty</i> ten kopeks daily.... That would have at
least bought salt, and a little lard to make up for the milk
that was to fail them now.</p>

<p class="c004">She returned to the dwelling-room, ready to speak her
mind.</p>

<p class="c004">“Antek!” she cried, in a hard, determined voice.</p>

<p class="c004">Silently he raised his bloodshot eyes to hers, with a gaze
of such immense anguish and sorrow that she was overwhelmed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_16">16</span>with dread, while her heart thrilled with compassion.</p>

<p class="c004">“Did you say they had come for the cow?”</p>

<p class="c004">“They are surely on the way; dogs are barking down
there.”</p>

<p class="c004">“No, that is in Sikora’s enclosure,” she said after having
gone out to look.</p>

<p class="c004">“They promised to come in the forenoon, and we have
only to wait.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, <i>must</i> we sell?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Alas! we want money, and our pasture-land is not
enough for Krasula and the heifer too.—Yes, we must,
Hanka; what’s to be done? I am sorry to lose the cow,”
he went on in a low voice, and with such sweetness of tone
that Hanka felt spellbound, while her heart went pit-a-pat
with great joy and hope: at that moment, she cared neither
for the loss of the cow, nor any of their other misfortunes.
And she gazed earnestly into his beloved face, listening to
that voice of his which entered into her like a flame, and
kindled such delightful feelings within her.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, yes, we must. Well, the heifer remains to us. She
will calve about Mid-Lent, and so we shall have a little
milk then,” she chimed in, wishing only to hear him speak
further.</p>

<p class="c004">“And if we should lack provender, we’ll buy some.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oat-straw perhaps: our rye will last till spring.—Father,
pray open our potato-pit: we must see if the potatoes we
have are not frost-nipped.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Father, stay where you are, the work is too hard for
you: I’ll do it.”</p>

<p class="c004">He rose, took his sheepskin down from the pole, and
went outside.</p>

<p class="c004">The snow was almost as high as the roof, for the cabin
stood in an open place, almost out of the village, a field’s
length from the road, and with neither hedgerow nor
orchard to keep the snow away. Several wild gnarled
cherry-trees grew in front of the windows, but they were so
buried in the drift that their branches alone stood protruding
<span class="pageno" id="Page_17">17</span>like human fingers twisted and bent by some disease.—Earlier
in the day, the old man had already cleared away
the snow in front of the cabin, but he had at the same
time covered the mound<a id="r3"/><a class="c002 pginternal" href="#f3"><sup>[3]</sup></a> so deep that it was impossible to
distinguish it in the snow.—Antek set vigorously to work:
the snow stood as high as a man, and—though lately fallen—it
had caked together and hardened so much that it had
to be cut out in lumps; and he sweated enough ere the
potato-pit was dug open. But he worked willingly, now
and then throwing a few flitters at the children, who were
playing outside the threshold. At times, however, he would
pause in his work to lean back against the cabin-wall and
look around. Then he would heave a profound sigh, and
his soul would once more go astray like a sheep lost in the
shadows of the night. The sky was all covered with a
whitish cloud, which hung at no great height. The snows
lay extended like a huge soft fleece, forming, as far as the
eye could reach, an immense plain, white with a tinge of
blue; the air, misty with suspended crystals of frost, seemed
to wrap the whole world in a delicate pellucid tissue. As
Bylitsa’s hut was on rising ground, one saw thence the whole
village spread out in a bird’s-eye view: those lines of snow-clad
mounds, like huge molehills, straggling away in long
strings round the pond, none completely bare, but all hid by
the white sheet spread over them. Here and there a granary
wall stood out, darkly prominent; ruddy-brown coils of
curling peat-smoke went up; or a few trees peered out, grey
beneath the dazzling mantle in which they were enveloped;
and athwart this world all of silver tinges, voices travelled
swift and sharp, heard together with the flails’ monotonous
<i>rutta-rutta-rutta</i>, drumming underground, as it were. The
ways were all snowed up; no one fared along them, nor
did any living thing darken the silvery expanse of the fields.
The hazy distances melted into one another, so that sky
and earth were undistinguishable, save where the forest
<span class="pageno" id="Page_18">18</span>made a faint blue stain on the white, as if some cloud were
hanging at the horizon.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek’s gaze wandered but for a little while over those
snowy wastes; it presently returned and sought his father’s
cabin; and in the search his attention was diverted by a cry
from Hanka, who had gone down into the potato-pit.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ha! they are not frozen! Vahnik’s store has been so
frost-bitten that half must be given to the swine to eat;
and ours—ours is quite untouched!”</p>

<p class="c004">“That is good news.—Pray go out and see, for if I mistake
not, the Jews are coming at last, and we must take the cow
out of the byre.”</p>

<p class="c004">“You are right: it is the Jews—who but they? Yes, it
is.—Poisonous creatures!” she exclaimed with abhorrence.</p>

<p class="c004">Along a pathway just visible by the marks of Staho’s
boots, made when he went out in the morning, there came
two Jews from the tavern, heavily plodding along, followed
by half the dogs in the village (that greatly enjoyed this
opportunity to bark at them) until Antek arrived and drove
them away.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, how do you do?—We come late, on account of the
snow.—Such drifts!—No driving through them, no getting
through on foot even, I tell you. They have had to employ
forced labour to make the road passable through the
forest.”</p>

<p class="c004">To these attempts at conversation he replied nothing, but
made them enter his hut to warm themselves a little.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka, having cleaned the cow’s soiled flanks and milked
away what had gathered since the morning, brought her
through the room into the yard. The cow made resistance,
unwilling to go out; on passing the threshold, she sniffed,
stretched her head forth into the air, licked the snow, and
on a sudden burst into long plaintive lowing, pulling so
hard at the rope that old Bylica could scarcely hold her.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka broke down. Seized with an unbearable pang, she
burst out crying, as did the children too, holding to their
mother’s skirt.</p>

<p class="c004">Nor was Antek in much better mood. He ground his
<span class="pageno" id="Page_19">19</span>teeth, leaned back against the cabin wall, and stared
doggedly at a lot of crows that had assembled on the snow
dug from the pit. The dealers meanwhile jabbered in
Yiddish to each other, and proceeded to feel the cow and
examine her critically.</p>

<p class="c004">The whole family, sick at heart, turned away in deep
dejection from the beast tugging at her halter and vainly
looking to her masters with great frightened eyes, and lowing
in vain.</p>

<p class="c004">“O Lord!—Was it for this, Krasula, that I fed you so
well, and cared for all your wants, that these men should
now take you to the slaughter-house, and destroy you!”
And in agony she struck the cabin wall with her head.</p>

<p class="c004">Alas! Wailing and lamenting were of no avail; for
“What needs must be—no man can flee,” as the saying is.</p>

<p class="c004">“How much?” the elder of the couple, a grey-bearded
Jew, asked at last.</p>

<p class="c004">“Three hundred <i>zloty</i>.”<a id="r4"/><a class="c002 pginternal" href="#f4"><sup>[4]</sup></a></p>

<p class="c004">“What! for that scraggy brute—three hundred?—Anthony,
is aught the matter with you?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Scraggy? Say ye no such word, or ye shall rue it!
Scraggy! Look but at her—so young—scarce in her fifth
year—and in such goodly condition!” So spoke Hanka,
enraged.</p>

<p class="c004">“Pshaw! Pshaw! Who doth business, a word shall not
anger him.—Say thirty roubles!”</p>

<p class="c004">“I have spoken.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And I shall speak. Thirty-one?... Well, thirty-one
and a half.—Thirty-two?—Then let it be thirty-two and a
half.... It’s a bargain?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I have said.”</p>

<p class="c004">“My last word: three and thirty!”—“Take it or leave it,”
added the younger Jew phlegmatically, looking round for
his staff, while the elder buttoned up his gaberdine.</p>

<p class="c004">Thereupon Bylitsa said, patting the cow’s neck: “For
such a beast as this!—O men, fear ye not God? A cow as
<span class="pageno" id="Page_20">20</span>large as a byre!—Why, her hide alone will be worth half a
score of roubles—O ye swindlers! ye murderers of Christ!”</p>

<p class="c004">But now the Jews began to chaffer eagerly, violently.
Antek stood stubbornly to his price; and though he gave
way a little, it was but little. Indeed, the cow Krasula
was very valuable; and had he been selling it in spring and
to another peasant, he would have got fifty roubles at least.
But “Necessity drives to the mart, with Poverty drawing the
cart.” This the Jews were perfectly aware of; and though
they shouted louder and louder, and struck their hands in
Antek’s with greater zeal to conclude the bargain, their
offers rose by at most half a rouble each time.</p>

<p class="c004">Finally it came to this pass, that they started home in
high dudgeon, and Hanka was leading the cow back to her
shed, while Antek himself was angered and ready to renounce
selling the beast at all—when lo! back they came
again, and shrieked and swore that they could not possibly
offer a higher price, and struck their hands in Antek’s
again ... till at last the man agreed to forty roubles,
plus two <i>zloty</i> for old Bylica, as the holder of the rope.</p>

<p class="c004">They paid on the nail; the old man led the cow after
them to the tavern where their sledge was waiting. Accompanied
by the children, Hanka went with Krasula as
far as the road, stroking her muzzle every now and then,
affectionately bending over her, and quite unable to conceal
her grief and affliction....</p>

<p class="c004">She stood long upon the road, looking at Krasula as she
was led away, and pouring out execrations on those unchristened
“Yellow Ones.”</p>

<p class="c004">To lose such a cow as Krasula was!—No wonder if the
poor woman felt her bosom overflow with gall!</p>

<p class="c004">When she came back, she said: “It is as if one of us
had been borne to the churchyard”; and she still continued
to peep into the empty stall, or to gaze through the window
at the pathway marked by the hoofs which had but now
passed there; and often and often did she give way to her
distress, and shed tears again and again.</p>

<p class="c004">“Now then, will you have done?” Antek cried out, seating
<span class="pageno" id="Page_21">21</span>himself at the table where the money lay. “Why, the
woman is for all the world like a calf; doth naught but
weep and blubber.”</p>

<p class="c004">“‘He that suffereth naught will for nothing have
thought,’” was Hanka’s reply. “You suffered nothing,
when you gave poor Krasula up to those Jews to be
butchered.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, you’d rather have me open my own bowels to get
you money!”</p>

<p class="c004">“And now we remain like the very last of hired servants—like
<i>Dziads</i>—without one drop of milk, without one crumb
of comfort! This—this is what my share of my own
house and home have earned for me.—Merciful heavens!
Other men work as hard as oxen, and bring something home;
and this man sells the very last thing—the cow, my marriage
portion, all I had from my family!” she went on in uncontrollable
excitement.</p>

<p class="c004">“Being a fool and without understanding, you may bellow
at your ease.—Here’s money for you. Pay what you
owe, buy what you need, keep the rest.” He pushed the
roubles over to her, but, taking five from the heap, put
them into his pocket-book.</p>

<p class="c004">“And why take so much money with you?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why? I am not going to start off with nothing but my
staff.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Start off? and whither?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Anywhither, if it be but away from here. I will seek
work, and not rot here in Lipka.”</p>

<p class="c004">“<i>Away?</i> A dog is barefoot everywhere—‘Where’er the
poor man goes, the wind against him blows.’—Ah! and I
am to stay here alone, say? Am I?” And, raising her
voice, she approached him with a threatening mien, not
knowing what she did; he meanwhile took no notice of her,
occupied as he was in taking down his sheepskin, putting
his girdle on, and looking for his cap.</p>

<p class="c004">“Work for the peasants here? That I will not,” he declared.
“No: though I should starve; I will not!”</p>

<p class="c004">“The organist is in want of a thresher.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_22">22</span>“That great man!—A calf who bleats in the choir, and
is good for naught else; whose eyes are always on the
farmers’ money-bags, and who lives on what he gets out of
them by begging or by lying!”</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Who has no goodwill shirks his duty still!’”</p>

<p class="c004">“Enough! You’re saucy!” he cried out in anger.</p>

<p class="c004">“When do I say a word to oppose you? You always do
as you please, and I am nowhere!”</p>

<p class="c004">“I shall apply at the manors,” he said presently, in a
gentler tone. “I mean to inquire about service to be had,
and perhaps may get something by Christmas. But I
would rather be a common ploughman elsewhere than rot
here, where the wrong done me stares me in the face at
every step. That I cannot bear. I have enough of it—enough
of being pitied by some, and looked upon by
others as a mangy dog!” As he spoke, he waxed angrier
and more highly wrought and Hanka, seized with terror,
stood petrified and motionless: she had never yet seen him
in such a state.</p>

<p class="c004">“Farewell. I shall return in a few days.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Antek!”—The word was a despairing scream.</p>

<p class="c004">“What would you?” He turned upon the threshold.</p>

<p class="c004">“Do you grudge me even a friendly parting word?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Is it caresses you mean? Oh, I am in no mood for
them just now.” And he went out, slamming the door.</p>

<p class="c004">Uttering a hissing sound between his shut teeth, he
walked on quickly through the snow with his staff. The
crisp surface crunched underfoot. He looked round at the
cabin. Hanka stood against the wall, dissolved in tears;
through the other window, Veronka was watching them.</p>

<p class="c004">“Good for nothing in the world but weep, weep, weep
again!—Now, forwards and away!” he said, with a glance
that swept the snowy wilderness round him. Seized with a
strange longing, he felt himself urged on, rejoicing in the
thought of unknown hamlets and a new life in a fresh world.
The feeling came upon him unexpectedly, and bore him
away, as a suddenly swollen torrent carries with it a weakly-rotted
<span class="pageno" id="Page_23">23</span>shrub, that can neither make head against it nor
remain motionless.</p>

<p class="c004">An hour before, so far from making up his mind to go,
he had never so much as entertained the thought. Ah! but
now he would fly—fly away like a bird, go anywhither—to
the forests, aye, and to the undreamed regions beyond them.
Truly, why should he stay here to waste his life? what had
he to expect here? The memories of the past had eaten him
up, dried his heart: for what reason, then, should he cleave
to them?—The priest was a good man, and had pointed out
clearly to him that he stood no chance in an action against
his father, which would besides be costly.—Vengeance?—That
might wait till the right time: no man had ever yet
wronged him with impunity. So now ... let him go on—straight
before him, no matter whither, if far enough from
Lipka!</p>

<p class="c004">But whither first of all?</p>

<p class="c004">He now stood at a bend of the poplar road, gazing, not
without some hesitation, over the fields which faded in the
misty remoteness. “I shall go through the village and
along the road beyond the mill.” And he at once started
that way.</p>

<p class="c004">Half a field’s length before striking off the road, he had
to turn aside; for under the poplars and down the middle of
the way a sledge was rushing straight in his direction, with
a cloud of snow-dust and a sharp jingling of bells.</p>

<p class="c004">It was Boryna, driving with Yagna. The horses tore
along with lusty hoofs, the body of the sledge tossed like
a feather behind them. The old man whipped them besides
to make them go faster, and urged them on. He was
speaking some words, too, and laughing! Yagna was talking
in a loud voice, when she suddenly beheld Antek. Each
for an instant looked into the other’s eyes—and then had
gone past. The sledge flashed by, and was engulfed in the
snowstorm it had made; Antek stood in the same spot, looking
round at them, and motionless. Now and again they
appeared out of the cloud of snow-dust; Yagna’s dress
<span class="pageno" id="Page_24">24</span>fluttered red in the wind; now the bells would tinkle louder,
and again fainter, inaudible, lost somewhere on that vast
white plain, beneath the arch of frosted boughs and between
the colonnade of dark trunks that sustained them....
These stood, as it were, drooping in a row, in their long and
weary uphill procession towards the forest. But Antek was
always aware of her eyes. They floated before him; they
appeared, in the midst of the snow—everywhere—with that
look of terror and of sadness; dreamy and pleased at once;
keen of glance and laden with the hot fire of life!</p>

<p class="c004">He felt his soul extinguished, so to speak, veiled in a
mist, frosted over and chilled to the core: but the deep-blue
eyes were shining bright within him. Hanging his head, he
dragged himself on with slow steps. More than once he
glanced round, but nothing was visible beneath the poplar
colonnade, save the blur of a snowy whirlwind fleeing away
with a tinkling of far-off bells.</p>

<p class="c004">Oblivion of all things came over him, as though he had
lost his memory by some strange happening. He stared
helplessly, not knowing what to do ... or where to go
... or what had come to pass. He was as one in a dream—a
waking dream, which he cannot shake off.</p>

<p class="c004">Almost unconsciously, he got to the tavern, passing several
sledges full of folk, amongst whom he recognized no one,
though he looked carefully.</p>

<p class="c004">“Where is that crowd of people bound for?” he asked
Yankel, who was standing in the doorway.</p>

<p class="c004">“For the court. There’s a lawsuit with the Manor about
a cow, and herdsmen assaulted: you know the affair. Those
are the witnesses; Boryna started before.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Will they win?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why should anyone lose? The complaint is against the
Squire of Vola, and the Squire of Rudka is to be judge.
Why should a Squire lose?—Besides, the folk will have an
excursion, will improve the roads, will enjoy themselves;
and the townsmen too need to do some business. So everybody
will gain a little.”</p>

<p class="c004">Antek was not listening to Yankel’s mockery. He
<span class="pageno" id="Page_25">25</span>ordered some strong vodka and, leaning against the bar,
stood musing there for a full hour, without even tasting the
liquor.</p>

<p class="c004">“Is anything ailing you?”</p>

<p class="c004">“What should ail me?—Let me into the private bar.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Impossible. Dealers are there—great merchants, who
have purchased another clearing from the Squire; that in
Vilche Doly. They must have rest; nay, it may be they
are sleeping now.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I’ll pull the scurvy rascals out by their beards!” Antek
cried, and rushed madly to the private bar; but ere he got
there, he changed his mind, and took his bottle to the darkest
nook in the room.</p>

<p class="c004">The tavern was empty and still, save for the Jews talking
together in their jargon, Yankel running to serve them, or
someone coming in to order a glass, toss it off, and withdraw.</p>

<p class="c004">It was now past noon, and the frost no doubt increasing;
for the sledge-runners creaked in the snow, and the tavern
grew colder. But Antek remained in a brown study, unable
to make out what was going on within him and around.</p>

<p class="c004">He took a dram, then another; but those eyes! They
were always with him—dark-blue, turquoise-blue!—and so
very near that his eyelids all but touched them.—A third
dram, and they grew brighter still, and seemed to whirl
about, as lights borne from one part of the room to another!—A
cold shudder went through him; terrified, he started to
his feet.</p>

<p class="c004">“Pay up, you!” shouted Yankel, blocking the way out.
“Pay up! I give you naught on trust.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Out of my way, you dog’s-blood Jew, or I kill you!”
Antek shrieked, with such furious violence that Yankel
changed colour and shrank away to let him pass.</p>

<p class="c004">He banged the door and rushed out.</p>
<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_26">26</span>
  <!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER II</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">Towards noon it had cleared up a little, but only as if
a rushlight had been kindled and whisked about
among the shadows; what brightness there was vanished
soon, and it grew dark again, and looked as if the
snow were gathering and about to fall once more.</p>

<p class="c004">In Antek’s hut it was extremely murky and cold and
cheerless. The children played upon the bed, and prattled
in whispers to each other. Hanka was so uneasy, she knew
not what to do. She went fidgeting about the place, or stood
outside with burning eyes, gazing over the snow. But
neither on the road nor in the fields did any living creature
meet her sight; only a few sledges were just visible, crawling
away from the tavern to vanish both from the eye and
the ear, lost in the abyss of limitless white.</p>

<p class="c004">She sighed. If there were but a beggar passing by, that
she might have someone to speak to!</p>

<p class="c004">She set to calling together the fowls that had dispersed,
seeking to roost on the cherry-trees, and made them return
to their usual roosting-place; but, on going in, had some
words with Veronka. What did it mean? The woman had
set down in the passage a pail of hog-wash for her swine,
which the dirty beasts had splashed about, and there was a
large pool right in front of Hanka’s door!</p>

<p class="c004">Without going in, she cried through the closed door:
“You who hold yourself such a good housewife, see to your
pigs, or tell your children to do so. I will not dirty myself
with mud for your sake!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, she has sold her cow, and so she is going to raise
her voice here, is she? She cannot bear mud now, the
grand lady! Yet her dwelling is a pigsty!”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_27">27</span>“Never you mind about my lodgings or my cow!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Then never you mind about my pigs; do you hear?”</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka slammed the door: what could she reply to such a
fury? One word said to her was sure to bring more than
twenty in return.—She bolted the door, took out the money,
and began to make up her accounts with infinite trouble,
blundering again and again. She was still upset; full of
resentment against Veronka, of disquietude about Antek.
Often, too, she fancied she could hear Krasula lowing; and
then at times memories of her girlhood at home came back
to her.</p>

<p class="c004">“True it is, though, too true, that our dwelling is like
a pigsty!” she muttered, looking about the room.—But
<i>there</i>!... There they had a floor, and the walls were
whitewashed, and all was warm and clean, and everything was
in abundance.... And the work there, was it much?...
Yuzka washed the things after dinner; Yagna spun, or
looked out of the bright frostless windows.... What did
she need, that she had not?... All the corals of Boryna’s
deceased wives were hers now; and petticoats, and kerchiefs,
and linen in plenty. She had not to trouble, not to earn
anything, and could eat her fill of fat things! And Staho
had said, moreover, that Yagustynka did all the work for
her; that she lay in bed till broad daylight, and had tea for
breakfast, because, forsooth, “potatoes did not agree with
her!” ... And the old man did nothing but make love
and fondle that woman as if she were a little child....</p>

<p class="c004">The thought roused a storm of rage in her; she started
up from the chest she sat on and shook her fist.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, the spoiler, the harpy, the wanton, the trull!” She
screamed so loud that old Bylica, dozing close to the fire-place,
started up in alarm.</p>

<p class="c004">She was calm in an instant. “Father, pray cover the
potatoes with straw, and then heap the mound with snow:
there is going to be a hard frost,” she said, and returned to
her accounts.</p>

<p class="c004">But somehow the old man’s work did not get on. There
was much snow, and he had little strength—And then, he
<span class="pageno" id="Page_28">28</span>felt uneasy: he had held the rope, and two <i>zloty</i> were for
him: should he have them? They had been lying there on
the table, glittering and almost new, as he well remembered.</p>

<p class="c004">“Perhaps they will give them to me,” he thought. “To
whom else do they belong? My arms are stiff with holding
the rope, Krasula pulled so hard; I held on nevertheless....
And how I praised her to the cattle-dealers! Oh, I made
them hear me!... Peter, the eldest boy—I should buy him
a mouth-organ at the very first local feast.... And the
younger one too should get something.... And Veronka’s
little ones too, naughty troublesome brats though they are....
And for myself, some snuff—strong—such as stirs one’s
inwards! Staho’s snuff is good for little, does not even
make me sneeze.”</p>

<p class="c004">But these musings affected his work so much that when
Hanka came round in an hour’s time, the straw was only
just covered with snow.</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, you eat enough for a man, and work less than a
child!” she said.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, Hanka, I am working hard, but I just stopped a
moment to breathe: I shall finish instantly—instantly!” he
stammered, greatly abashed.</p>

<p class="c004">“The twilight is coming down from the forest, the frost
is growing harder, and the pit looks as if swine had been
rooting there. Go ye into the hut and tend the babes.”</p>

<p class="c004">She herself set to work, and with such energy that the
pit was very soon covered up and splendidly heaped over
with snow.</p>

<p class="c004">But when she had done, it was already dusk; the dwelling
had become colder; the damp clay floor, stiff with the
frost, clattered beneath her clogs; and once more the frost
painted its patterns on the panes. The children, too,
whimpered low; but she did nothing to quiet them, for
she was in haste. She had to cut straw for the heifer, and
feed the pigs, that came squealing and nuzzling against
the door, and give water to the geese. Besides, she must go
over the accounts again—find how much she was to pay, and
to whom. At last all was done, and she prepared to go out.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_29">29</span>“Father, you will light the fire, and take care of the
babes.—Should Antek come back, there is cabbage for him
in the saucepan on the hob.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, yes, Hanka, I shall see to everything.—The cabbage
is on the hob; yes, I shall see, I shall see to it.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah!—About the rope-money, I have taken it. You do
not want it, surely? You have food to eat; you have
clothing.... What more do you need?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, Hanka, yes; I have everything—everything,” he
replied in a low voice, turning quickly round to the children,
lest she should see his tears fall.</p>

<p class="c004">As she went out, the cold gripped her. A bluish darkness
was spreading on every side, dry and peculiarly transparent.
The sky was clear as crystal, with unclouded
horizon, and a few stars already twinkling on high.</p>

<p class="c004">On her way, Hanka mused. She thought she would try
to find some sort of work that Antek could do, and not let
him go away.—But now his last utterance came back to
her, and made her faint with alarm. For never in her life
could she leave her village to live elsewhere; no, never
could she abide among strange folk!</p>

<p class="c004">She gazed on the road, the houses scattered along it, the
orchards scarce seen above the snow, and the immense fields
all around, now growing grey in the twilight. The silent
ice-cold evening fell faster and faster: star after star came
out, as if someone up there was sowing them by handfuls;
and upon the glimmering earth, glimmering in snowy-white
expanses, the cabin lights began to shine, smoke shed its
scent through the air, men went slowly about the ways, and
voices seemed skimming very low along the ground.</p>

<p class="c004">“All this has grown into me, is part of me; and I will
not stray about the world like a wandering wind. Oh, no!”
she said with energy to herself, walking now somewhat
slower; for from time to time she met with caked snow
that broke and let her in up to the knees.</p>

<p class="c004">“This is the world which our Lord has given me—mine!
Here will I live and here will I die.—If we can but hold
out till the spring!... Say that Antek refuses to do any
<span class="pageno" id="Page_30">30</span>work. Well, I shall not be forced to beg. I will take up
spinning—or weaving—or anything I can turn my hand to,
and not let misery conquer me. Veronka, I know, earns
enough by her weaving to put money by.”</p>

<hr class="c011"/>

<p class="c004">Such were her thoughts as she entered the tavern, where
Yankel was as usual nodding over a book. He paid no
attention to her till she set the money before him; then he
smiled in friendly wise, helped her to reckon the sum right,
and even offered her some vodka. But he said no word to
her either of Antek’s debt to him or of the man himself,
until she was about to depart; when he asked her what her
husband was doing.</p>

<p class="c004">She replied that he was seeking work.</p>

<p class="c004">“He would be useful in the village. They are putting up
a sawmill here, and I need someone experienced in carting
timber.”</p>

<p class="c004">“My husband would never go into tavern service.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Is he such a great man as that? Then let him slumber
and sleep!—But ye have some geese: if ye will, fatten them
a little, and I will purchase them when yule-tide comes.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I cannot sell any; I have but enough for breeding.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Then buy some goslings for the spring; as soon as they
are well fed up, I’ll take them. And if you care, you may
have all on credit here, and you will pay me in geese.—A
running account....”</p>

<p class="c004">“No, I shall not sell any geese.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, but you will, when the money from your cow is
gone ... and sell them cheap, too!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Scurvy one! you’ll not live to see the day!” was her
mental comment as she went out.</p>

<p class="c004">The air was so frosty now, it made the nostrils tingle.
The heavens were scintillating, and a bleak piercing blast
blew from the woods. Nevertheless, she kept her course
right in the middle of the road, gazing with interest at all
the cabins. Vahnik’s, next the church, had all the candles
lit; from Ploshka’s enclosure came a hum of voices and the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_31">31</span>squealing of swine; at the priest’s, the windows shone bright,
and several horses pawed the ground impatiently in front
of his veranda; at the Klembas’, too, opposite the priest’s,
lights were gleaming, and you could tell, by the crackling of
the crunched snow, that someone was going to the byre.
Further, in front of the church, where the village forked out
and seemed stretching forth two arms that clasped the pond
in their embrace, but little met the eye beyond a few lights
on a dusky white background, in which dogs were heard to
bark.</p>

<p class="c004">Heaving a sigh as she glanced over at her father-in-law’s
cabin, she turned off from before the church to pass between
two long fences that separated Klemba’s orchard from the
priest’s garden, and together formed a road leading to the
organist’s. This was little trodden and so much overshadowed
with underwood on either side, that ever and anon
showers of snow fell on her from the trees she brushed
against.</p>

<p class="c004">The dwelling was situated in the background of the priest’s
court-yard, and had no other separate cartway.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka was presently aware of an outcry and the sound of
sobbing, and beheld outside the entrance a black box and
various articles scattered on the snow—a feather-bed, some
wearing-apparel, and so forth.... Magda, the housemaid
at the organist’s, stood by the wall, crying bitterly and
screaming aloud.</p>

<p class="c004">“They have turned me out! They have driven me forth!
Like a dog! Out into the world, the wide, wide world!
Whither shall I go now—bereft of all—oh, whither?”</p>

<p class="c004">“You swine, you swine, scream not thus at me!” cried a
voice from the open entrance-passage; “or I’ll take a stick,
and make you hold your peace pretty quickly. Begone this
instant, and betake you to your Franek, you jade!—Ah,
how are you, Hanka?... My dear, this business you see
was to be expected since autumn. And I pleaded with that
wench, I talked to her, implored, watched over her; but who
can guard a wanton? When we all were sleeping, out she
<span class="pageno" id="Page_32">32</span>would go a-walking ... and has walked so well that now
she has a bastard for her pains!—How often did I say:
‘Magda, take care; consider: the man will never marry
you’ ... and she would declare to my face that she had
naught to do with him! And when I saw the creature
changing form and swelling like leavened dough, I said to
her: ‘Go to some other hamlet, hide yourself, ere people
see your shame.’ Did she listen? No.—And to-day, while
milking in the byre, she was taken with great pangs and
upset the milking-pail; and my girl Franka ran to me in a
fright, crying out that something had befallen Magda.
Good Lord! such a disgrace, and in my house!—Take yourself
off now, or I’ll have you cast out on to the road!” she
cried again, coming out in front of the house.</p>

<p class="c004">Magda left the cabin wall and, with many a sob and
moan, set to making all her things into a bundle.</p>

<p class="c004">“Do come in now; it is cold.—But you! leave no trace
behind you!” shouted the dame, as she went in.</p>

<p class="c004">She led Hanka in through a long passage.</p>

<p class="c004">There was a very large low room, lit by a big fire that
burned bright on an open hearth. Red as boiled crayfish,
the organist, in his shirt-sleeves rolled up to the elbows,
sat baking altar-breads at the fire. Every now and then he
dipped a ladle into a dish of thin half-liquid paste, and
poured the contents into a cast-iron mould, which he then
closed, squeezing it till the hot paste hissed.<a id="r5"/><a class="c002 pginternal" href="#f5"><sup>[5]</sup></a> He then placed
it on the fire, supporting it on an upright brick set there,
and, opening and turning it round, took out the newly
baked bread, which he cast upon a low bench just by. Here
sat a little boy, trimming the edges of each of the oblong
loaves with scissors.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_33">33</span>Hanka greeted them all, and kissed the hand of the
organist’s wife.</p>

<p class="c004">“Sit down and warm yourself.—And now, what news?”</p>

<p class="c004">Unable to find at once the words she wanted, and feeling
ashamed, she gave a timid side-glance into the other room,
where, opposite the door, and on a long table, stood a white
pile of altar-breads, pressed down with a board. A couple
of girls were making them into packets, each tied with a
paper wrapper for distribution. From the unseen portion
of the room came the monotonous tinklings of a harpsichord
twangling under some unknown performer’s fingers—and
suddenly breaking off with a jarring discord that gave Hanka
gooseflesh and made the organist exclaim:</p>

<p class="c004">“There, there—quite wrong: you’ve ‘eaten a fox!’—Repeat
from ‘<i>Laudamus pueri</i>.’”</p>

<p class="c004">“Are you making these for Christmas already?” she asked,
feeling it would be discourteous to sit silent.</p>

<p class="c004">“We are. The parish is big and straggling; and, as all
the altar-breads have to be taken round before Christmas,
we must begin betimes.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Are they of pure wheat?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Pray taste them.”</p>

<p class="c004">She gave her one that was still hot from the mould.</p>

<p class="c004">“I scarcely dare to eat of it.” She took it with a corner
of her apron, holding it up to the light with awed and
respectful scrutiny.</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, what curious designs are stamped upon it!”</p>

<p class="c004">“On that first circle, to the right, you see our Blessed
Lady, St. John, and our Lord. On the other there is the
manger, the rack, the cattle, the Child on its couch of hay,
St. Joseph, and again our Lady; and here are the Three
Wise Men, kneeling.” Such were the explanations of the
organist’s wife.</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, yes; I see.—Oh, how wonderfully these designs are
made!”</p>

<p class="c004">She wrapped the altar-bread in a kerchief and put it in
her bosom.—A peasant had entered and told the organist
something; at which he cried:</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_34">34</span>“Michael! They have come for a christening: take the
key and go to the church. His Reverence knows and will
come, but Ambrose must stay to serve the company.”</p>

<p class="c004">The harpsichord became mute, and a tall pale lad passed
out of the room.</p>

<p class="c004">“My brother’s orphan boy. Practises to learn playing
with my husband, who teaches him gratis. We must make
a sacrifice, and do something for our own flesh and blood.”</p>

<p class="c004">Little by little, Hanka became more communicative, and
at last brought out the story of her sufferings and troubles,
though piecemeal and with much hesitation. It was the
first time she had been able to speak openly of all that had
passed.</p>

<p class="c004">They listened and talked to her with sympathy; and
though they took good care not to mention Boryna’s name,
they showed her so much sincere compassion that it made
her weep very copiously. Now the organist’s wife, being a
clever intelligent woman, understood what Hanka wanted,
and came out the first with a proposal.</p>

<p class="c004">“Listen: you may perhaps have a little spare time.—Would
you spin some wool for me? I thought I would get
it done by Pakulina, but ’tis better you should do it.”</p>

<p class="c004">“May God reward you! I was indeed in want of work,
but durst not ask for it.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Well, well, no thanks: folk ought to help their
neighbours. The wool is carded, and weighs about a
hundred pounds.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, I shall spin it, and am well able. Why, when with
my parents, I not only spun thread but wove cloth and
dyed it. We never had to buy garments.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Look at it: how soft it is! and how dry!”</p>

<p class="c004">“’Tis beautiful wool. From the Manor sheep, belike.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, and should you happen to need flour or groats or
pease, pray let me know; you shall have all you want, and
I will settle when I pay you.”</p>

<p class="c004">She then took her into a store-room full of sacks and
barrels of corn, and flitches of bacon hanging from the
walls. The rafters bore long skeins of spun yarn in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_35">35</span>clusters, and on the floor thick rolls of linen cloth lay piled
up. As to the strings of dried mushrooms, the cheeses, the
jars crammed with various good things, the shelves groaning
under huge round loaves, and the other articles of household
consumption, who could tell them all?</p>

<p class="c004">“You shall have the smoothest yarn that hands can make,”
said Hanka. “And thanks once more for all your kindness.
But I fear I shall be unable to carry all that wool by
myself.”</p>

<p class="c004">“It will be taken over to you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“That is well, for I have still to go about the village.”</p>

<p class="c004">She again thanked her, but now with something less of
warmth and expansiveness: envy was gnawing at her heart.</p>

<p class="c004">“’Tis our people gives them all they have, carries it to
them, and produces the same ... and their store-rooms
overflow by our gifts! Besides, who knows how much
money they have out at high interest? Ah, ‘Who has sheep
to shear, he shall have good cheer.’ ... It were harder work
for them to produce all this.—Well, well!” So she thought
on her exit from the house, whence Magda had now disappeared
with all her things; and as it was getting late, Hanka
quickened her pace.</p>

<p class="c004">Where—and of whom—could she inquire about work for
Antek?</p>

<p class="c004">When on her father-in-law’s farm, she had found everybody
friendly; people were constantly coming to visit her,
either to get some service done or to exchange kind looks
and words. And now there she was, standing out in the
cold, and knowing not to whom she could go!</p>

<p class="c004">She stopped in front of Klemba’s, and of Simon’s too:
but she was loath to enter, for now she recollected how
Antek had told her not to make any calls. “People can do
nothing, and will give no assistance—only pity; and that
they would give just as well to a dead dog!” he had said.</p>

<p class="c004">“How true, oh, how true he spoke!” she said, remembering
the organist and his wife.</p>

<p class="c004">Oh, had she but been a man! She would have set to work
at once, and put everything to rights. She would not then
<span class="pageno" id="Page_36">36</span>have had to whine and lay bare her wounds that her
neighbours might pity her!</p>

<p class="c004">She experienced in her soul a devouring, a ravenous
craving for work, and such a concentration of force as
stiffened her frame and gave firmness and speed to her
steps. She also felt a longing to pass near her father-in-law’s
cabin, were it but to look at the premises from without,
and satisfy the desire of her eyes! But in front of
the church door she turned away to follow a narrow path
that led over the frozen pond to the mill; and she walked
fast, not looking to right or left—careful only not to slip
on the ice, determined to pass swiftly by and see nothing,
lest her heart should be wounded again by the remembrance
of the past. But she failed. Somehow, just opposite
Boryna’s, she stopped suddenly, and could not take her
eyes away from the lights that glimmered in the windows.</p>

<p class="c004">“It is ours—ours!... How can we possibly go from
here?... The blacksmith would seize it instantly. No! I
do not budge hence. Here shall I stay, like a watch-dog,
whether Antek stays or not!... His father is not immortal;
and other changes too may come about.... I
will not see my children despoiled, nor will I go from the
village.” These thoughts passed through her mind, as she
gazed upon that snow-covered orchard, and the faint outlines
of buildings beyond: the silvered roofs, the dark-tinted
walls, and—in the background, behind a shed—the
sharp cone of a haystack.</p>

<p class="c004">The night was still, cold, black-hue, oversprinkled with
a sand of stars, it seemed, and wrapping the snowy earth in
silvery folds. The trees stood drooping under the weight
of snow that bent them down, as if slumbering incomprehensibly
in the stillness which flooded the world: white-sheeted
phantoms, vapoury, yet rigid. Every voice had
died away; only something—was it the breathing of those
entranced inanimate trees? was it a murmur from the quivering
stars?—something there was that trembled in the air.
And there stood Hanka, forgetful of the minutes which went
<span class="pageno" id="Page_37">37</span>by, forgetful of the sharp intolerable cold, her eyes staring
on that homestead, greedily drinking the sight of it, taking
it all into her heart, absorbing it with all the strength of her
insatiable dreams.</p>

<p class="c004">A sudden crackling in the snow woke her up: someone was
coming by the same path across the pond, and in a little
she looked upon Nastka.</p>

<p class="c004">“What, you, Hanka?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why such amazement? Am I dead, and is it my ghost
you see?”</p>

<p class="c004">“What fancy has taken hold of your I had not seen
you for a long time, and was surprised.—Which way are
you going?”</p>

<p class="c004">“To the mill.”</p>

<p class="c004">“My way too; I am taking Matthew his supper.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Is it a miller’s trade he is learning there now?”</p>

<p class="c004">“A miller’s? No, indeed! They are building a sawmill
here in such great haste that they are now working at it even
at night.”</p>

<p class="c004">They walked on together, Nastka prattling away, but
careful to say no word about Boryna; and Hanka, though
she would have been glad to hear, feeling that she could not
possibly ask.</p>

<p class="c004">“Does the miller pay well?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Matthew gets five <i>zloty</i> fifteen <i>groschen</i>.”</p>

<p class="c004">“So much as that?”</p>

<p class="c004">“No great wonder, since he is at the head of everything.”</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka said no more till, passing in front of the smithy,
whence a ruddy light flowed through the unpaned window,
crimsoning the snow, she muttered:</p>

<p class="c004">“That Judas! Never in want of work to do!”</p>

<p class="c004">“He has engaged an assistant, and is himself continually
travelling. Also he is with the Jews in that forest business,
and occupied with them in deceiving the people.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Do they cut down the clearing yet?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Are you dwelling in the woods, that you do not know?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Not so; but I am not greedy for village news.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_38">38</span>“Well, let me tell you, they are cutting down a bit of the
forest that was already bought.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Of course; our folk would never permit them to fell the
trees on our clearing.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Even for that, who would interfere? The Voyt holds
with the Manor folk, and the Soltys too, and all the
wealthier men.”</p>

<p class="c004">“True. Who is it can get the better of a rich man? or
who can overcome him?—Well, Nastka, pray look in at our
home.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Farewell.—Yes, I shall bring distaff and spindle one of
these days.”</p>

<p class="c004">They separated in front of the miller’s dwelling, and
Nastka went on to the mill, down below, while Hanka
passed through the yard into the kitchen. She had great
trouble in getting there; a number of dogs swarmed round
her, barking and driving her to the wall. Eva came to
protect her and usher her in; and just then the miller’s
wife arrived, saying:</p>

<p class="c004">“If you have business with my husband, he is in the
mill.”</p>

<p class="c004">She met him coming back to his house; he took her to the
family room, where she immediately paid all she owed for
meal and groats.</p>

<p class="c004">“You are living on your cow, hey?” he said, throwing the
money into a drawer.</p>

<p class="c004">“What would you have?” she replied, offended. “One
cannot live on stones.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Your goodman is a sluggard, let me tell you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“So you say. But what work is he to do? where? with
whom? Tell me.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Are no threshers needed here?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Of course such work is not to his taste; he was never
yet a common farm-labourer.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I am sorry for the man. He’s headstrong, without respect
for his father, and fierce as a wolf; all the same, I am
sorry.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I—I have heard—that you, Sir Miller, have work to be
<span class="pageno" id="Page_39">39</span>done; perhaps you might employ Antek.... I beseech
you...” Here she fell a-weeping and imploring him
very earnestly.</p>

<p class="c004">“Let him come.—Mind, I do not ask him. Work there
is, but hard work. To hew the trees into logs—ready to be
sawn.”</p>

<p class="c004">“That he can do: few men in the village as well.”</p>

<p class="c004">“That’s why I say, Let him come.—But you, my woman,
you do not look after him properly. Not at all.”</p>

<p class="c004">She stood amazed, having no idea of what he meant.</p>

<p class="c004">“The fellow has a wife of his own. Children too. And
yet he is running after another man’s wife.”</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka turned white; the words were a thunderbolt.</p>

<p class="c004">“It’s true what I say. He wanders nightly. Has been
seen out more than once.”</p>

<p class="c004">Her relief was immense, and she breathed freely again.
She knew all about it ... how he was driven to wander by
the memories of the wrongs suffered. Oh, she understood
him well! but the folk had painted things the colour they
preferred.</p>

<p class="c004">“It may be that work, if he sets to it, will drive love-making
from his mind.”</p>

<p class="c004">“He is a farmer’s son....”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, yes! Quite a Squire, is he not? And he would pick
and choose, just like swine before a full trough. If he is so
hard to please, why did he quarrel with his father? why run
after Yagna? For think of the sin and the shame of it!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Sir!” she exclaimed, hastily. “What on earth are you
thinking of?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I only say the thing that is. All Lipka knows. You
may ask,” he rapped out jerkily, in a loud voice; for he was
a very impulsive man, who always liked to blurt out things
just as they were.</p>

<p class="c004">“Well, but may he come here?” she asked, almost in a
whisper.</p>

<p class="c004">“He may. To-morrow, if he cares—What ails you? what
are these tears for?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Nothing ... nothing but the cold.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_40">40</span>And she went away, with slow, heavy footsteps, scarcely
able to crawl along. The world had grown dark for her,
the snow was grey now, she could not find the path she came
by, and tried in vain to brush away the tears that were
freezing on her lashes. So she walked on, wrapped in darkness,
very sudden—and dolorous—O Lord! how dolorous!</p>

<p class="c004">“He, in love with Yagna!... With Yagna!” She stood
breathless, her heart fluttering like a shot bird.</p>

<p class="c004">“But perhaps it is a falsehood; the man may have lied!”
In her fright she clung to this possibility and clutched at it
with both hands.</p>

<p class="c004">“Lord! was there not enough of misery and humiliation
already, but this—this too must fall upon my wretched
head?” She gave way to her grief for a moment, moaning
aloud; then, to overcome it, began to run as though wolves
had been on her track, so that she entered her hut all panting
and more dead than alive.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek had not returned.</p>

<p class="c004">The little ones were on their grandfather’s sheepskin,
spread out as a rug before the fire-place, and he was making
a little windmill to amuse them.</p>

<p class="c004">“Hanka, they have brought wool—brought it in three
sacks.”</p>

<p class="c004">She opened them, and at the top of one found a loaf, some
bacon, and at least half a gallon of groats.</p>

<p class="c004">“God bless her for her generous heart!” she said, much
moved, and thereupon prepared a plentiful supper, and afterwards
at once put the children to bed.</p>

<p class="c004">The whole cabin was very quiet now. On Veronka’s side
they had gone to bed already, and her father had fallen
asleep in his pallet near the fire. But Hanka remained in
front of the hearth and span.</p>

<p class="c004">She span long and far into the night, even to the first
cock-crow, and as she twisted the thread, so too she revolved
in her mind the miller’s words: “He is running after
Yagna.”—Yagna!</p>

<p class="c004">The spinning-wheel hummed busily, monotonously, tranquilly.
Night, with frozen face, looked in at the window,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_41">41</span>and rattled at the panes, and sighed, pressing close against
the wall. The cold came creeping out of the corners, caught
at her feet, spread itself in hoary blotches over the clay
floor; crickets struck up their ditty, somewhere behind the
hearth, and only held their peace when either of the children
cried out in his sleep or turned in his bed. Yet more intense
grew the frost, clutching all things and pressing them in his
iron claws: many a time did the planks overhead crack and
creak, and fissures were cloven in the old bulging walls with
a noise like a pistol-shot, and fibres in some beam broke,
with a rull report. Surely the cold had penetrated even to
the house-foundations; they shuddered at times, it seemed,
with the pain of it, and the hut itself shrank together, crouching
and quaking in the dreadful frost.</p>

<p class="c004">“Why did the thought of this never come to me? Aye,
she—so well-favoured, so well-knit, so comely to behold!
And I—a poor thin creature, merely skin and bones! Have
I the power to attract him? dare I even try? If I should
give my heart’s blood, it were naught: he cares no whit for
me. What am I to him?”</p>

<p class="c004">Helplessness, still but torturing—how cruelly torturing!—now
took possession of all her being. She was even beyond
shedding tears. She felt as if she were a shrub that
the frost is killing, that is as unable to avoid its doom as to
cry for help or to protect itself: anguish was riving her soul
as the frost rives the shrub. Resting her head on her wheel,
she dropped her hands and looked out into vacancy, musing
on her lot. Long, long did her reverie last, with only at
times a few burning tears falling from her heavy eyelids on
to the wool, there to freeze into a rosary of anguish—tears,
as it were, of blood.</p>

<p class="c004">The next day she rose somewhat calmer. This was of
course; the storm had had time to blow over. What the
miller said might or might not be true; but should she droop
and complain, now that everything was on her shoulders—the
children, and the house matters, and all the trouble and
woe?</p>

<p class="c004">Who would see to things, unless she did? She knelt down
<span class="pageno" id="Page_42">42</span>before our Lady of Sorrows, and prayed fervently; and,
begging our Lord to set things to rights, she made a vow
that she would go on foot to Chenstohova in the spring, and
have three masses said, and—as soon as she should be able—take
a great lump of wax to the church for tapers to be
made of it.</p>

<p class="c004">Greatly relieved by this vow, she was able to do plenty
of spinning; but the day, though bright and sunny, seemed
immeasurably lengthy to her, and her anxiety about Antek
increased.</p>

<p class="c004">He came at last, but only in the evening, at supper-time,
and looking so worn and subdued, and greeting her so
kindly! He had bought some rolls for the little ones.</p>

<p class="c004">She almost forgot her suspicion. And when he also went
to cut straw for fodder, and helped her with the animals, she
felt tenderly and deeply agitated.</p>

<p class="c004">However, he neither told her where he had been nor what
he had done, and she did not venture to question him.</p>

<p class="c004">When supper was over, Staho came in: a thing he frequently
did, in spite of Veronka’s prohibition; and a little
later, quite unexpectedly, who should drop in but old
Klemba? They were not a little surprised, for since their
expulsion no one in the village had been to call upon them
yet: it seemed clear enough that he had come on some business
or other.</p>

<p class="c004">But he told them quite simply that he had come to see
them because nobody else came.</p>

<p class="c004">They were sincerely and deeply grateful.</p>

<p class="c004">Sitting one alongside of the other on the bench in front
of the fire, they then entered into grave and serious conversation,
while old Bylica now and then put more fuel on
the hearth.</p>

<p class="c004">“A pretty sharp frost, is it not?”</p>

<p class="c004">“So sharp,” said Staho, “one can hardly thresh without
sheepskin and gloves on.”</p>

<p class="c004">“The worst is that wolves are about!”</p>

<p class="c004">All stared at Klemba in astonishment.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_43">43</span>“Oh, ’tis quite true. Last night they were at the Voyt’s,
burrowing under the sty. Something must have frightened
them away, for they did not get at the pig: but the burrow
ran quite beneath the foundations; I went myself at noon
to see. There must have been five of them at least.”</p>

<p class="c004">“That, beyond all doubt, betokens a hard winter.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, the frosts have only just begun, and behold, the
wolves are here!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Near Vola,” Antek said, with much animation, “on the
road beyond the mill, I saw tracks of a whole pack, crossing
the way slantwise; but I fancied they were the Manor
hounds. Very like, they were wolves.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Went ye as far as the clearing?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Not so; but I hear it said they are only felling the wood
bought close to Vilche Doly.”</p>

<p class="c004">“The keeper told me the Squire will not take a single man
from Lipka to work there: punishing them, I suppose, because
they stand up for their rights.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Who is to cut down the trees, if not the men of Lipka?”
Hanka asked.</p>

<p class="c004">“My good Hanka, there are folk in plenty seeking work,
begging for work. Are there few in Vola itself? few in
Rudka? and in Debica, are the paupers fewer? Let the
Squire but lift up his voice: he will find hundreds of able-bodied
peasants who will swarm round him the very same
day. So long as they fell trees only on the purchased
land, let them do so by all means; there is but little of it,
and besides, it is too far from our village.”</p>

<p class="c004">“What if they set to work on our<a id="r6"/><a class="c002 pginternal" href="#f6"><sup>[6]</sup></a> forest too?” Stach
inquired.</p>

<p class="c004">“That we will not permit!” Klemba replied, briefly and
with emphasis. “We will fight it out, and the Squire shall
learn who is the stronger—he or all the people. Yes, he
shall learn.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_44">44</span>Here they dropped the subject, which was a matter too
burning to please anyone; but not before old Bylica
had, in stammering and hesitating tones, had his say about
it:</p>

<p class="c004">“I know that generation of the Squires of Vola, I know
them well: they will steal a march upon you somehow.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Let them try,” said Klemba. “We are not little children.
They shall not succeed.” And no more was said.</p>

<p class="c004">Then they spoke of Magda, and how the organist had expelled
her. Here again, Klemba gave his decision:</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, the deed was not very charitable. But then one
cannot force them to set up an infirmary in their home for
Magda, who is neither kith nor kin to them.”</p>

<p class="c004">The talk then became desultory, and the guests left them
somewhat late. As he went, Klemba, after his short-spoken
and simple fashion, told them, “if they lacked of aught,
just to let him know, and he would behave as a neighbour
should do.”</p>

<p class="c004">And now Antek and his wife were alone.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka hesitated a long time; but at last, after many
timorous catchings of the breath, she asked him if he had
found any work.</p>

<p class="c004">“No. I was at more than one manor, and looked about
me there, and among the folk too; but I found nothing.”
This he said with a low voice and eyes on the ground; for
though he had indeed wandered about, he had done nothing
more, and made no attempt to get work.</p>

<p class="c004">They went to bed. The children were asleep by this time;
they lay at the foot of the bed for the sake of greater
warmth. Darkness reigned, save for the moonbeams that
darted through the sparkling frozen panes and threw a luminous
band obliquely athwart the room; but the two could
not sleep. Hanka tossed from side to side, considering
whether she had better tell him about the sawmill now, or
wait till the morrow.</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, I went seeking work. But even had I found something,
I would not have left the village. To go astray about
<span class="pageno" id="Page_45">45</span>the world like a masterless dog is not to my liking.” So he
whispered, after a protracted silence.</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, that is just what I too was thinking—just the very
same as you!” she said joyfully. “Why go away and seek
for bread, when we can get quite good work here at home?
The miller assured me he had something for you to do at
the sawmill, and that you might begin to-morrow. You
would get two <i>zloty</i> fifteen <i>groschen</i>!”</p>

<p class="c004">“What?” he snarled. “Did you go a-begging to him?”</p>

<p class="c004">“No, no,” she explained in much fear. “I only went to
pay what I owed him; and he told me himself he intended
to send for you.”</p>

<p class="c004">Antek did not answer. The two lay motionless and
speechless side by side; but sleep fled from their eyes. They
were thinking, thinking, down in the mysterious depths of
their minds; sometimes breathing a sigh, or at others letting
their souls melt away in the dull dead stillness. Outside,
far, far and faint on the country-side, they heard dogs baying,
and cocks flapping their wings, and crowing at midnight,
and the muffled murmur of the wind soughing overhead.</p>

<p class="c004">“Do you sleep?” She crept a little closer to him.</p>

<p class="c004">“No.—Slumber has forsaken me.”</p>

<p class="c004">He was on his back, his hands clasped behind his head.
So near her! yet in heart and thoughts so far off! He
lay very still, almost without breathing, forgetful of everything;
for once more Yagna’s eyes shone out of the dark—deep
blue in the moonlit night.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka approached him yet nearer, and rested her burning
face upon his shoulder. No suspicions now remained in her
heart, nor any regrets, nor the least drop of bitterness; only
true love, faithful affection, full of trust and self-surrender.
And she came close—close to his heart.</p>

<p class="c004">“Antek,” she asked him with a thrill of eagerness, “will
you go to work to-morrow?” She was so fain—so longing
to hear his voice, and converse with him, heart to heart.</p>

<p class="c004">“Perhaps I shall. Yes, I must go; I must.” But his
mind was filled with other thoughts.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_46">46</span>“Pray, Antek, go. Go, I pray you.” With a tender
appeal, she put her arm around his neck, and sought his
lips, which hardly breathed, with the burning kisses of her
mouth.</p>

<p class="c004">Not the least emotion did he feel. He paid no heed to her
embraces, he was not even aware of her at all, as with eyes
wide open he gazed into those other eyes—Yagna’s eyes.</p>
<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_47">47</span>
  <!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER III</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">It was not very early in the morning when the miller took
Antek on as a workman, and, leaving him in the yard
amongst great piles of logs, went to Matthew, who was
just then getting some timber placed in the sawmill, and
setting the saws in motion. After a few words with him, he
called out to Antek:</p>

<p class="c004">“Then you are to work here, and obey Matthew in everything:
he is my deputy.” So saying, he walked away, for a
very bleak and piercing wind was just then blowing from
the river.</p>

<p class="c004">“I suppose you have no ax?” Matthew inquired, after coming
down and greeting him in a friendly way.</p>

<p class="c004">“I have brought a hatchet: I was not aware....”</p>

<p class="c004">“You might as well use your teeth. The wood is frozen
hard, and brittle as glass: a hatchet would not bite into
it. For to-day, I’ll lend you an ax; but you will have to
whet it. And to a flat edge, mind.—Bartek, get to work
with Boryna and let this oak-log be ready presently: the
other will have been sawn in no time.”</p>

<p class="c004">From behind an enormous log that lay in the snow, there
rose up a tall and wiry but stooping figure of a man, wearing
clogs and red-striped trousers with a pipe in his mouth, a
grey sheepskin cap on his head, and a tawny leather furred
jacket on his back. Resting himself on his ax, he whistled
through his teeth, and exclaimed merrily:</p>

<p class="c004">“We are going to be wedded together. All right. We shall
be a happy pair, and never fall out or fight!”</p>

<p class="c004">“A fine forest. The trees are as straight as tapers.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, but full of knots all the same. ’Tis awful ... as
if the timber had been sown with flints. The days are
few, when the ax is not notched by them. You mustn’t
<span class="pageno" id="Page_48">48</span>sharpen your ax quite smooth, but draw it along the grindstone,
whetting it on one side only. That makes the edge
stronger, you see. And deal with the iron as when you
want to manage somebody—you find which way he is to be
taken, and how; and then you lead him like a dog on a
string.—The grindstone is in the mill, by the groat-bin.”</p>

<p class="c004">In a very short time indeed Antek was at work, cutting
off the projecting spurs, and hewing the log to a rectangular
shape along marks made with tar by Bartek. But he
was taciturn and moody, and resentful of having—he, who
was a Boryna!—to do the biddings of such a one as Matthew.</p>

<p class="c004">“Not bad, your work, not bad at all!” Bartek remarked.</p>

<p class="c004">And indeed his work was excellent: the art of fashioning
logs was not unknown to him. But it was hard labour for
one unaccustomed to it, and after a time he was out of
breath, and perspiring to such an extent that he took his
sheepskin off. But the frost was hard and held pitilessly;
he had constantly to stand and work deep in the snow; his
hands were so benumbed, they almost stuck to the ax-handle,
and the time seemed so long to him, he could scarcely hold
out till noon.</p>

<p class="c004">Yet he would take neither bite nor sup for dinner, only
dry bread and river water; nor would he even enter the
mill, for fear lest he should meet some acquaintance, come
to bring corn and awaiting his turn. He stayed out in
the frozen air, sitting close to the wall as he crunched his
bread and gazed up at the sawmill shed, built over the river,
one of its sides touching the main building, so that the
stream from the four mill-wheels swept under it with a
great rush of green water, making the shed above to vibrate.</p>

<p class="c004">But he had not yet rested properly, nor had a good
breathing-space, when Matthew, who had dined with the
miller, shouted as he came out:</p>

<p class="c004">“To work, men! To work!”</p>

<p class="c004">So, much against his will, and groaning over the shortness
of his noonday rest, he was forced to pull himself together
and once more take up what he had to do.</p>

<p class="c004">All were in lively movement and worked briskly; the frost
<span class="pageno" id="Page_49">49</span>was so intense, and Matthew urged them with so much zeal.</p>

<p class="c004">The mill clattered unceasingly; beneath its wheels, all
overgrown with icicles like a long greenish mane, the stream
went rushing noisily on. The saws rasped away with continuous
crackling harshness, as the sound of one biting glass
to bits, and they spat the yellow sawdust forth. Matthew
was everywhere, active and indefatigable, always shouting
and urging the toilers to hurry up. He filled the whole
place, nimble as a goldfinch pecking at hempseed; his short
red-striped spencer, his grey sheepskin cap, were seen flying
about over the trodden snow covered with chips, where
they were getting the logs ready—ordering, scolding, laughing,
joking, whistling, and working as hard as any; but for
the most part on the platform close to the saws. For this
sawing-shed had no side-walls, only a roof; so that its whole
interior was visible from outside. It rose above the river
on four stout piles, against which the current rushed with
such force and fury that the roof, made of reeds and resting
only on those piles, often trembled like a wisp of straw in
a gale.</p>

<p class="c004">“A good craftsman he is, that fellow!” quoth Antek, with
unwilling recognition.</p>

<p class="c004">“And well paid too!” Bartek growled in reply.</p>

<p class="c004">They beat their arms against their chests to keep off the
increasing cold, and went on working silently.</p>

<p class="c004">Of workmen there were enough. Two were at the saws,
rolling the sawn logs down to the yard and dragging up
fresh ones; two more were cutting off the one end of each
log that had been left untouched, and making the sawn
planks into piles or carrying into a shed those too thin to
bear the outside cold; and a couple of others were stripping
the bark off oak and fir and pine logs. To these last, Bartek
used often to shout in jest:</p>

<p class="c004">“Devil take you, how ye skin them! Ye’ll be pastmasters
in dog-flaying, belike!”</p>

<p class="c004">But they objected to such jokes, for they never had anything
to do with the dog-killer’s craft.</p>

<p class="c004">All these men Matthew kept so hard at work that they
<span class="pageno" id="Page_50">50</span>could only seldom and by stealth find means to run round to
the mill, warm their freezing hands, and come back at a
gallop, pressed hard by the work itself.</p>

<p class="c004">Twilight was nearly over when Antek crawled home, so
weary and broken that every bone in him ached. After
supper he went to bed at once and, falling asleep, slept as
one dead.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka had no heart to inquire about anything, but tried
to make him as comfortable as she could, keeping the children
quiet, asking her father to make no noise with his
boots, and walking barefooted in the room herself; and when
he prepared at daybreak to go to work, she boiled a pot of
milk for him to take with potatoes for breakfast, that he
might feed better and be warmed.</p>

<p class="c004">“Confound it!” he declared; “my bones ache so, I cannot
move about.”</p>

<p class="c004">Bylitsa remarked that this was only because he was not yet
accustomed to, and that it would soon pass off.</p>

<p class="c004">“Of course it will pass off: I know that.—Hanka, will you
bring me my dinner?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I will, I will: why should you come hither so far?”</p>

<p class="c004">He then started at once, the work being due to begin with
the day.</p>

<p class="c004">Many a day of hard and weary toil followed.</p>

<p class="c004">Whether the frost baked the ground at the height of its
fierceness, or the gusts and snow-charged gales were blowing,
or a thaw came, and they were forced to stand the livelong
day in the melting slush, while the bleak damp cold entered
their very marrow, or the snow fell so that Antek could
hardly see his ax—they had to work all day long till every
vein and sinew of the body ached with weariness: the four
saws devoured the timber so fast that the men were hardly
equal to supplying them; and Matthew was driving them on
besides.</p>

<p class="c004">But what exasperated him was not the work; for, as wise
men say, “Whatever you take to well, can give comfort even
in hell.” No: what he could not bear was Matthew’s position
of superiority, and his continual sneers.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_51">51</span>The others had got used to these; but he could not help
boiling with indignation each time; and more than once he
uttered so fierce a snarl that the overseer’s eyes flamed. And
then, of set purpose, he would begin to criticize everything
about Antek: not openly to his face, but always animadverting
on anything imperfect in his work, till the latter tingled
all over and felt his fists clench of themselves. He nevertheless
restrained himself, damped his fires, and simply put
all these things by for future remembrance, being well aware
that Matthew only awaited an opportunity to oust him from
his place.</p>

<p class="c004">Now, though Antek cared little for his work in itself, he
was resolved not to be put down and triumphed over by
any man alive.</p>

<p class="c004">And the outcome of all this was that their mutual hatred
grew deadlier every day: Yagna, like a festering wound,
being at the bottom thereof. Ever since last spring, possibly
since last Carnival, both had alternately followed her, each
trying to get the better of the other, secretly indeed, yet well
aware of the other’s attempts. Matthew, however, worked
in the open, telling everyone of his love, while Antek was
compelled to hide his feelings, and let a dull, yet burning
jealousy devour his heart.</p>

<p class="c004">There never had been much love lost between them, and
they had always looked somewhat askance at each other,
and would boast great things in the presence of third parties,
each holding himself to be the strongest fellow in the whole
village. And now that this mutual hate had grown to such
an extent in a few weeks, it had came to pass that neither
would address the other; they passed by, glaring like angry
wolves.</p>

<p class="c004">Matthew was not a bad fellow, nor even of churlish disposition.
On the contrary, he had a good heart, and an
open helping hand. His only defects were too much self-confidence,
and a tendency to set himself above others, together
with a belief in his irresistibility with the other sex.
No girl, he thought, but must give way to him; and he said
so, and bragged of it, and was the first of men in his own conceit.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_52">52</span>He now also enjoyed telling folk that Antek worked
under his orders, and looked up to him humbly lest he
should be expelled.</p>

<p class="c004">For those that knew the latter, it was surprising to mark
how he kept himself calm, and stooped to behave so humbly
as he did. But there were those who said there was something
brewing under all this; that Antek had never yet overlooked
an insult, and would one of these days take his revenge.
These were even ready to bet that Matthew would
soon find out that he was (as they say) biting at a very sour
apple.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek, of course, who never looked in anywhere, was ignorant
of all that was said. He used to pass by without
speaking even to his acquaintances, always going straight
home after working-hours. But he, too, felt that there was
something about to happen, and he saw plainly through
Matthew’s doings.</p>

<p class="c004">“But I’ll beat you into such a jelly, you carrion, that the
very dogs will have none of you, and you’ll never brag
any more!” Such was the cry that escaped him one day at
work. Bartek heard and said:</p>

<p class="c004">“Take no thought of him; he is paid to drive us, and he
does.” The old man had not caught the meaning of that cry.</p>

<p class="c004">“I cannot brook even a dog that barks without cause!”</p>

<p class="c004">“You take it all too much to heart; it heats your liver,
and makes you, as I see, toil too feverishly.”</p>

<p class="c004">“No, I work like that on account of the cold,” he answered,
wishing to make some reply or other.</p>

<p class="c004">“Let us do all things slowly, step by step. Slowly; for the
Lord Jesus, who might have made the world in one day only,
chose to do so in a whole week, with one day of rest. Why
should you be so anxious to wear yourself out for the miller
or anyone else’s sake? Who forces you?—Matthew is a
watch-dog, nothing more: why take his barking amiss?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I spoke as I felt,” Antek said; and then, to change the conversation,
“Where were you last summer?” he asked. “I
did not see you in the village.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I worked a little, saw something of this God’s world,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_53">53</span>looked about me, and filled my soul with spiritual food,”
he answered deliberately, whilst hewing the other side of
Antek’s log, now and then straightening himself, and stretching
his limbs till the joints cracked: always pipe in mouth.</p>

<p class="c004">“I was working with Matthew at the new Manor; but he
drove too hard, and it was springtime in the land, and the
sunshine smelt sweet. So I left him. There were folk going
that way down to Kalvarya;<a id="r7"/><a class="c002 pginternal" href="#f7"><sup>[7]</sup></a> so I went with them to gain
the indulgences and see a bit of the country.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Is it far to Kalvarya?”</p>

<p class="c004">“’Tis beyond Cracow.—But I did not get so far. In a
village where we stopped to dine, there was a peasant building
a hut, and he knew as much about building as a goat
knows about pepper! He made me angry; I swore at the
man, for he was wasting good timber—and in the end I
stayed on with him. In a couple of months I had built him
a house like a villa; and for that he would perforce have
me wed his sister, a widow that had five acres of land hard
by.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Old, I dare say.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Not young, ’tis true; but still comely enough. Rather
bald, to be sure; lame, too, with a cast in her eye; and
smooth of face to look upon, as a loaf nibbled by mice for
a fortnight. But a pleasant woman, and a kind one; gave
me lots of good things to eat—now scrambled eggs with bits
of sausage, now vodka and lard, now other dainties. And
she took to me so that I might have shared her cot any day,
had I cared.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why did you not? Five acres are always worth having.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, I had no mind for any woman. Of petticoats I have
long had more than enough. They are always crying out
and screaming, like magpies in a hedge: you say one word,
and they bang a score at your head, like a handful of peas.
You have your reason to go by; they have only their
<span class="pageno" id="Page_54">54</span>tongues. You talk to them, thinking to be understood: and
they neither understand nor heed you, but jabber foolishness
only.—They say our Lord created woman with only half a
soul. It must be so—and the devil has supplied them with
the other half.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Perhaps,” Antek put in sadly, “some women may be intelligent.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Some crows may be white, but none has ever seen any.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Tell me: were you ever married?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I was! Oh, yes, I was!” He stopped short, straightened
himself, and his grey eyes looked far, far away. He was an
old man, dry as a wood-shaving, but sinewy: and straight
too, save when at times he drooped, and the pipe wobbled
about in his mouth, and his eyes, as now, blinked with quick
flutterings.</p>

<p class="c004">“Time for the next log!” cried the man at the saws.</p>

<p class="c004">“Hurry now, Bartek! Don’t dawdle there! The saws are
stopping!” shouted Matthew.</p>

<p class="c004">“He’s a fool—wants things done quicker than possible.</p>

<div class="lg-container-l c012">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“‘There comes a rook to church;</div>
      <div class="line">“A priest am I!” he screeches,</div>
      <div class="line">And croaks from pulpit-perch,</div>
      <div class="line">And fondly thinks he preaches,’”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c013">Bartek grumbled, as in anger; but some other emotion had
taken hold of him, and his rests were more frequent, and
he sighed at times, looking southward for noon.</p>

<p class="c004">Luckily it came then: the women were there, with the
dinners in the pots they carried. Hanka appeared from behind
the mill. The saws ceased their rasping, and they all
went to eat in the building, Antek, who knew the miller’s
man, going to his room. At present he did not avoid folk,
nor turn away from them, but would look them in the face
with eyes that made them turn their own away.</p>

<p class="c004">In a room too hot almost to breathe in, there sat several
persons in sheepskins, talking joyously. These were people
from villages at some distance, who had brought corn that
was to be ground while they waited. They had crammed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_55">55</span>with peat the little stove that was already red-hot, and were
smoking cigarettes and chatting, so that the whole room
was as dim as it was hot.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek seated himself on a sack near the window and, with
the pot between his knees, he fell to with great zest, first
upon the dish of cabbage with peas, and then upon another,
made of potatoes mashed with milk. Hanka, crouching on
the floor by his side, looked tenderly on him. Hard work
had made him thinner, and in places the skin had peeled off
his face: yet to her he seemed the handsomest man on earth.
Yes, just as he was: tall, straight-limbed, lithe; slender-waisted,
broad-shouldered, supple; his face a long thin oval,
his nose like a hawk’s beak, but only slightly curved; his
eyes full, a greyish green, under eyebrows that seemed drawn
with charcoal from temple to temple in one straight line, and
were terrible to behold when he knit them in angry mood;
his forehead lofty, but half covered with hair that fell over
it, straight down, like a mane, dark almost to blackness; and
that upper lip of his, clean-shaven after the peasants’
fashion, disclosing a row of white teeth within crimson
borders, like a string of ivory beads! Oh, she was never
tired of gazing upon him!</p>

<p class="c004">“Could not your father bring the dinner? You have to
go so far every day!”</p>

<p class="c004">“He had to remove the dung from our heifer’s stall; and
besides, I preferred to come myself.”</p>

<p class="c004">And she always managed to do so, for the mere sake of
gazing at his comely form.</p>

<p class="c004">“Any news?” he asked, as his dinner came to an end.</p>

<p class="c004">“Nothing much. I have spun one sack of wool, and taken
the yarn—five hanks of it—to the organist’s wife. She was
very much pleased.—Our little Peter is not well: he won’t
eat and is hot and feverish.”</p>

<p class="c004">“He has only overeaten himself.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Surely, surely.—Oh, and Yankel came to buy our geese.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Will you sell them?”</p>

<p class="c004">“A likely thing, indeed! To buy others when spring comes
round?”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_56">56</span>“Do as you choose. I leave all that to you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And at the Vahniks’ there has been a fight again, and
his Reverence has been sent for to reconcile them.—And they
say that the calf at the Paches’ has choked itself with eating
carrots.”</p>

<p class="c004">“That’s all one to me,” he growled impatiently.</p>

<p class="c004">“—And the organist came collecting sheaves,” she said
after a while, with a tremble in her voice.</p>

<p class="c004">“What did you give?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Two handfuls of carded flax, and four eggs.—And he
said that, if we wished, he would let us have a wagonful of
oat-straw, and wait till summer for payment. But I did
not accept: why should we take aught from him? And
moreover, we have a right to your father’s pasturage. We
had only two cartloads—far too few for so many acres....”</p>

<p class="c004">“I will not remind him of it, and I forbid you to do so.
For the spinning you do, take the oat-straw from the organist.
If you will not, then sell all our livestock. So long as
I live, never will I ask my father for anything whatsoever.—Do
you understand?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I do, and shall apply to the organist.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Your work, together with mine, will perhaps suffice.—Hanka,
no weeping here: they see us!”</p>

<p class="c004">“I am not weeping.—Antek, pray ask the miller for half
a hectolitre of barley to grind: if we bought it ready ground,
it would cost more.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Good. I will tell him to-day, and stay on here one of
these evenings to see it ground.”</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka left him, and he remained, smoking cigarettes in
silence. They were just then talking of the Squire of Vola,
and of his brother.</p>

<p class="c004">“His name is Yacek: I knew him well!” Bartek exclaimed,
coming into the room.</p>

<p class="c004">“Then of course you know he has returned from foreign
parts.”</p>

<p class="c004">“No, indeed. I thought he had died long ago.”</p>

<p class="c004">“He is here; arrived a fortnight back.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, he has come, but—so folk say—not quite in his
<span class="pageno" id="Page_57">57</span>right mind. He refuses to live at the Manor, and has gone
to dwell in the pine-forest, where he does everything for
himself—cooking, sewing, and all. Everyone wonders at
him. In the evening he plays on his violin: they often and
often meet him on the roads near certain graves, where he
sits and plays tunes.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I was told he goes from hamlet to hamlet, asking people
for news of one Kuba.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Kuba?—Many a dog is named Tray!”</p>

<p class="c004">“He gives no surname, but seeks the man Kuba, who
carried him off a battle-field, it seems, and saved his life
once.”</p>

<p class="c004">“There was a Kuba at our farm who went out with the
nobles in the last insurrection; but he’s dead,” Antek
observed, rising to his feet; for Matthew was already shouting
outside:</p>

<p class="c004">“Come out, you: are ye to make dinner last till teatime?”</p>

<p class="c004">Antek, much ruffled, rushed out, and cried:</p>

<p class="c004">“Do not spend breath in vain, we all can hear you!”</p>

<p class="c004">“He is too full of meat, and eases his belly with shouting!”
was Bartek’s remark; and someone added:</p>

<p class="c004">“The noise he makes is but to curry favour with the
miller.”</p>

<p class="c004">Matthew went on grumbling: “They must dine and enjoy
long chats at their ease,—must they not?—these grand
fellows, these big farmers, who haven’t one whole pair of
breeches!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Take that, Antek; that’s for you!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Hold your peace, and let not your tongue clack so, or
I’ll cut it out for you!” Antek had raised his voice, ready
now for anything. “And never a word more about farmers!”</p>

<p class="c004">Matthew darted a murderous look at him, but replied
nothing. For the whole day, he mutely watched Antek’s
work with the most rigid scrutiny, but without finding anything
against him. He worked so admirably well that the
miller himself, who came round several times a day to look
over the work done, could not find any fault with it, and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_58">58</span>at the first weekly payment raised his wages to three <i>zloty</i>.</p>

<p class="c004">At this Matthew, in a towering passion, had words with
the miller, who answered: “I am satisfied both with him
and with you, and with every man who works well.”</p>

<p class="c004">“You have raised his wages merely to spite me!”</p>

<p class="c004">“I have done so as in justice bound, and want all men to
know I am just. Why, he is worth as much as Bartek, if
not more.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Then,” Matthew threatened, “I throw the whole damned
business up. You may do the work yourself!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Do so, if you choose. If my black bread is not to your
taste, go seek rolls elsewhere. Young Boryna will take your
place, and that at four <i>zloty</i> daily,” the miller said, with a
laugh.</p>

<p class="c004">Matthew cooled down immediately, seeing that bullying
was out of the question. He gave up his persecutions, put
his dislike for Antek deep into his pocket (though there it
burned like a live coal), and also became less exacting, less
of a taskmaster for the men. This they were not slow to
perceive, and Bartek presently remarked to the others:</p>

<p class="c004">“He’s like the dog that snapped at a man’s boot, got
kicked on the muzzle, and fawned on him. Aye, he thought
he was the favourite, and knows now he will have to go as
soon as a better man is found.”</p>

<p class="c004">Both to the rise in wages, and to Matthew’s knuckling
down, Antek was indifferent; he cared for all that as much
as for the year gone by. It was not for the money’s sake,
but to please Hanka, and for his own satisfaction, that he
was working. Had he made up his mind to lie on his back
all day long, he would have done so, no matter what came
of it.</p>

<p class="c004">Thus day after day, week after week slipped by, till Yule-tide,
in hard incessant labour. Little by little, his mind
grew calmer—frozen up, as it were: so far was he from
resembling the man he had been. Folk marvelled at this,
and judged him diversely. But the change in him was only
external and for the eyes of men: within he remained as he
was before. He worked now, and toiled hard, gave his
<span class="pageno" id="Page_59">59</span>wife every <i>groschen</i> he earned, stayed at home of evenings,
was kinder than ever, silent, peaceful; played with his
children, helped his wife at home, nor ever said a cross word
to anyone. But all this did not avail to hoodwink Hanka.
His transformation pleased her, indeed, and she fervently
thanked God for it, watching over him, attentive to the
looks in his eyes to find out what he desired—the most
attached and thoughtful of servants. But she would often
note a mournful gleam in his eye, and overhear a low sigh
that escaped him. Then her arms dropped to her sides, and
her heart died within her as she sought in her mind, thinking
whence the evil that was to come would proceed. Well
did she know that something terrible was fermenting within
him—something that he repressed only by putting forth his
whole strength—something that crouched secretly, sucking,
sucking the life-blood of his soul!</p>

<p class="c004">But whatever he felt, good or evil, he said nothing. After
his work he returned straight home, choosing the longer way
by the other side of the pond, that he might not pass near
his father’s home, not meet with ... someone.</p>

<p class="c004"><i>Someone!</i></p>

<p class="c004">Therefore, too, he stayed at home on Sundays, although
Hanka besought him to come to church with her. He feared
a meeting with Yagna; he felt that he should not stand it,
that he never could resist.</p>

<p class="c004">Besides, he had heard from Bartek, with whom he was
not on unfriendly terms, how the village folk were always
busied about him; how they watched and spied upon him at
every step, as on a thief. And he had himself more than
once seen eyes that peeped at him round corners, with swift
peering glances,—glances which would have loved to penetrate
his very soul, to search all that was therein, and
explore it through and through.</p>

<p class="c004">“The wretches! But they shall get nothing out of me,
nothing!” he would say bitterly, all the more stubborn in
his hate because he kept more aloof from everyone.</p>

<p class="c004">“I need no one; I am on such terms with myself that I
can scarcely bear my own companionship,” he would reply
<span class="pageno" id="Page_60">60</span>to Klemba, when the latter reproached him for never coming
to see them.</p>

<p class="c004">This was true, most true; he could hardly bear to live on
thus, continually holding himself down with all his might,
breaking his soul in as with an iron curb, and keeping it
under the strictest control. But he felt himself giving way
with sheer weariness of the struggle; ever more and more
frequently there came over him the longing to throw everything
up and yield to his fate—happy or miserable, it
mattered little to him. He was disgusted with life, and
devoured with sadness—infinite sadness, which, like a bird
of prey, had sunk its talons deep into his mangled heart.</p>

<p class="c004">To bear the yoke thus was irksome beyond words: he
choked and strained in bonds, as a horse tethered in a
paddock, or as a chained-up dog might do.</p>

<p class="c004">He thought of himself as a fruit-tree, broken by the
gales, condemned to die, withering slowly in the midst of a
blossoming orchard full of lusty life.</p>

<p class="c004">And Lipka—Lipka went on as usual. There were christenings,
as at the Vahniks’; betrothals, as at the Klembas’
(though now they had no music, they took as much enjoyment
as was allowed in Advent); then in some families there
was a death, as at that other Bartek’s, whom his son-in-law
had beaten so fearfully that he pined away and lay moaning
until at last refreshed in Abraham’s bosom. And Yagustynka
had once again brought another action against her
children for breach of contract. Many another thing was
going on besides, something new in nearly every hut, and
folk had plenty of matter for gossip, and for laughter and
for sorrow. And throughout the long winter evenings, the
women gathered together and spun in many a cabin. And,
Lord! how they all did laugh and chatter and wrangle, till
the noise of their jollity was heard far out on the road!
Everywhere there was no end of squabbling, of striking up
friendships, of wooings, of trysts outside the homesteads;
of turmoils and fightings and sweet converse: as in an ant-hill
or in a beehive, so the folk swarmed and buzzed within
their cabins.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_61">61</span>Yes, everyone lived as he pleased, as seemed best to him
and was fitter both to himself and his neighbours, and
according to the commandments of God.</p>

<p class="c004">And he, Antek, stood alone, outside of them all, cut off
from humanity; like a strange bird, hungry, yet afraid, that
will perhaps flap its wings outside the lighted windows, and
long to draw nearer to the corn-filled stacks—and yet does
not: only wheels around, listens, feeds on its hunger, gulps
down its thirst, and never will draw nigh!</p>

<p class="c004">Unless—unless God should deign to work in him a change
that might last for ever, and make him a new creature!</p>

<p class="c004">Alas! of such a change he dreaded as yet even to think.</p>

<p class="c004">One morning, only a few days before Christmas, he met the
blacksmith; who, though Antek would have passed him by,
blocked the way and, stretching out his hand, said to him
kindly and in a slightly sad tone:</p>

<p class="c004">“And I expected you’d come to me as to a brother. I
could have talked with you and aided you, little as we have
at home.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why did you not come first?”</p>

<p class="c004">“What? intrude and be driven away like Yuzka?”</p>

<p class="c004">“You were right. ‘He that suffereth naught will for
nothing take thought.’”</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Suffereth naught!’ Is not my grievance the very same
as yours?”</p>

<p class="c004">“How dare you tell me such a barefaced lie? Am I a
witling in your eyes?”</p>

<p class="c004">“As I love the Lord God, I have spoken naught but the
truth.”</p>

<div class="lg-container-l c012">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“‘The fox, it is a cunning beast:</div>
      <div class="line">’Twill run and sniff and turn and twist,</div>
      <div class="line in12">And with its tail</div>
      <div class="line in12">It sweeps its trail,</div>
      <div class="line">That none may nose the scent of it,’”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c013">said Antek, with contempt.</p>

<p class="c004">“Your grievance is, I know, that I went to the wedding.
It is true that I did not refuse. But how could I? The
<span class="pageno" id="Page_62">62</span>priest himself urged and pressed me not to offend God,
making division between the children and their father.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, ye went at the priest’s bidding, did ye? Tell that
to him that will believe you, not to me.—Oh, but ye wring
out of the old man all ye can wring, as the price of your
friendship: he does not send you away empty-handed!”</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Who takes not what is offered him’s an ass,’” the
blacksmith quoted. “But I’ll not argue that with you. All
Lipka will tell you—why, you may ask Yagustynka, who is
always with the old man—that I press him to make it up
with you. It will come about ... he will calm down ... and
we shall arrange matters.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Try to reconcile dogs, not him and me: do you hear?
I never thought of quarrelling with you; but now, let me
alone, you and your reconciliations!—Look at him! A
fine friend indeed! Never would you reconcile us, unless to
get the last coat off my back!—Once for all, I tell you: let
me alone, and do not come in my way; for if I ever fall
into a passion, I’ll tear your red hair off your scalp, and
play the devil with your ribs: aye, and your good friends,
the gendarmes, will not prevent me. Just remember that.”</p>

<p class="c004">He turned on his heel and went off, not even looking
round at the smith, who stood with mouth wide open in
the middle of the road.</p>

<p class="c004">“The rotten liar!—Hand in glove with the old man, to
come and talk to me of friendship! He that would make
beggars of both of us, if he could!”</p>

<p class="c004">It took him some time to cool down after this meeting;
especially as everything that morning went wrong with him.
He had scarcely begun chopping the logs, when a knot made
a notch in his ax; then, just before noon, a piece of timber
crashed upon his foot, and only failed to crush it by a rare
good chance: he had to pull his boot off and cool his swollen
foot with ice. Matthew was, moreover, in bad humour that
day, finding fault with everybody: this was badly done, that
done too slowly; and, as for Antek, he took every pretext to
grumble at him.</p>

<p class="c004">Everything went wrong; even the barley that Franek was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_63">63</span>to have ground, and about which Hanka was always troubling,
had not been done yet, the excuse being press of work.</p>

<p class="c004">At home, too, things were not quite right. Hanka was
distressed and tearful, for little Peter lay sick of a burning
fever, and she had been forced to call in Yagustynka to
fumigate him.</p>

<p class="c004">She came just at supper-time, sat by the fire, looked furtively
about her, and would have liked to gossip very much,
but that they received her attempts very coldly; and so she
presently set to trying her healing powers on the boy.</p>

<p class="c004">“I am off to the mill,” Antek said, taking his cap; “unless
I see the barley ground myself, it never will be done.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Could not Father go in your stead?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I shall be far more likely to get it.”—He went off in a
hurry, ill-humoured, out of sorts, tossed about like a
solitary tree in a storm. Besides, everything at home enraged
him—especially those prying ferret eyes of Yagustynka.</p>

<p class="c004">The evening was still and not frosty, with but few stars
to be seen—only one or two, twinkling far away as through
a veil. The wind blew from the woods, with a dull humming
murmur, betokening a change of weather. Dogs barked
dispersedly about the hamlet, smoke trailed along the road,
and the air, though bleak, was damp.</p>

<p class="c004">Christmas being at hand, there were plenty of people at
the mill. Those whose corn was being ground waited in the
passage; the others stayed in the room of the miller’s man.
These formed a circle round Matthew, who was telling them
something very funny, at which they every now and then
burst into laughter. Antek did not care to cross the threshold,
and went out to look for Franek at the mill.</p>

<p class="c004">“He is on the dam,” they said, “squabbling with Magda—you
know—the wench the organist turned out.”</p>

<p class="c004">“The miller,” another peasant told him, “has threatened
to send him away, if he is ever again seen in the mill with
Magda; for she used to spend her nights there. But, poor
thing! where else has she to go?”</p>

<p class="c004">And someone else added, jestingly: “‘What in March we
pursue, in November we rue!’”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_64">64</span>Antek sat down to wait, close to the place where the
finest flour was ground, and opposite to the half-open door
of the waiting-room. There he could discern Matthew’s
shoulders, and the heads of the others all turned towards
him and intent on what he was telling them. But for the
clatter of the wheels, he could have even made out what was
said, though he had no curiosity that way.</p>

<p class="c004">He threw himself on to some sacks of corn, and presently,
out of sheer dejection and weariness, began to doze.</p>

<p class="c004">The mill clattered away, flapping, throbbing, and in full
activity in every one of its compartments; the wheels beat
as if a hundred washerwomen were all using their bats with
might and main; the water swirled past them with a bubbling
hullabaloo and, churned up into boiling foam and snowy
flakes, rushed on to the river.</p>

<p class="c004">For hard upon an hour, Antek stayed there, expectant,
but at last made for the yard to go and seek Franek and
also to rouse himself up somewhat, feeling overcome with
slumber. The way out led through the waiting-room, which
he was just going to enter, and his hand was upon the latch,
when what he heard Matthew saying made him stop on a
sudden.</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, the old fellow boils the milk and tea, and takes it to
her in bed! They say that he, along with Yagustynka, does
all the kine want done for them, and will not let her soil
her hands; nay, that he has bought something for her in
town, lest she catch cold by going out behind the barn!”</p>

<p class="c004">Here followed a burst of loud laughter, and then a hailstorm
of jests. Antek, by an instinctive movement, returned
to where he had sat before and, flinging himself again upon
the sacks, gazed vacantly at the streak of ruddy light that
came from the door which stood ajar. Now he could hear
no more, for the din made the talk inaudible; a grey mist of
flour-dust rose and dimmed everything round him; the
lamps, which hung by cords from the ceiling, twinkled
through the white fog, and glowed athwart it, as yellow as
cats’ eyes, and vibrated continually. But he was too restless
<span class="pageno" id="Page_65">65</span>to stay seated; again he rose, and quietly and on tiptoe
approached the door, and bent his ear.</p>

<p class="c004">“... She explained everything!” Matthew said. “Dominikova
assured him that the girl had been in a hurry,
scrambling over a fence ... it was a thing that very
frequently happened ... had occurred to herself when a
maiden. A most convenient explanation! And he believed
her, the old ram! Such a clever man! and he believed her.”</p>

<p class="c004">The laughter became a hurricane; they all were in paroxysms,
and made the house ring again.</p>

<p class="c004">Nearer and nearer crept Antek, now almost on the very
threshold, pale as a corpse, with fists clenched, crouching and
gathered together for a spring.</p>

<p class="c004">When they had done, Matthew continued: “But as to
what they say of Antek’s being on too friendly terms with
Yagna, I happen to know that to be false. I myself heard
him whining like a dog outside her bedroom door, till she
drove him out with a besom! He stuck to her like a burr
to a dog’s tail, but she got rid of him for all that.”</p>

<p class="c004">Someone here inquired: “Did you see that? In the
village they talk otherwise.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Did I see?—Why, I was in there with her, and she herself
complained how he teased her!”</p>

<p class="c004">“You lying cur!” Antek shrieked, as he darted past the
threshold.</p>

<p class="c004">Matthew instantly sprang at him. But, swift as thought,
Antek was upon him with the leap of a wolf. One hand
clutching at his throat, stopping both breath and voice, the
other grasping his belt, he whirled him up in the air like a
bush you root out, burst open the door with a kick, and
rushed with him beyond the sawmill to the river-fence,
against which he hurled him with such fury that four rails
broke like reeds, and Matthew fell into the stream like a
log!</p>

<p class="c004">A great tumult and clamour ensued, for in that spot the
river was deep and swift. They hastened to the rescue and
got him out at once, but he was insensible. The miller
<span class="pageno" id="Page_66">66</span>came running in directly and sent for Ambrose, who came
in at once. The people from the village assembled in
crowds, till Matthew was conveyed into the miller’s house;
he swooned again and again, and spat much blood. And
as they feared he could not live through the night, the
priest was sent for.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek, as soon as Matthew had been carried out, coolly
took his place by the fireside, chatting with Franek, who
had turned up; and when the folk were back in the room
again, and things a little more quiet, Antek spoke out, so
loud that all could hear him:</p>

<p class="c004">“If anyone shall a second time bait and mock me, I will
do the like to him, yea, and more also!”</p>

<p class="c004">No one answered a word. They only gazed upon him in
profound wonder and respect. How had it been possible to
lay hold on such a man as Matthew, lift him up as easily
as a bundle of straw, carry him out and hurl him into the
river? So stupendous a feat had never yet been heard of.
They might have fought together, wrestled, and one in the
end have overcome the other, with breaking of bones even,
or the crushing out of life: that was quite a usual thing.
But no: he had taken the man, just as you take a puppy by
the ears, and thrown him into the river! That the rails had
broken his ribs, that was nothing; he might get well. But
the shame of it, the shame, was what Matthew would never
be able to bear: he was disgraced for all his life.</p>

<p class="c004">“Really, really, my dear fellow,” one man repeated to
another, “never yet has such a thing been!”</p>

<p class="c004">Heedless of their talk, Antek got his meal ground and
went home about midnight. He saw the lighted window of
the room at the miller’s where they had taken Matthew.</p>

<p class="c004">“Foul dog!” he said as he glanced that way, and spat on
the ground in hatred, “ye never will boast again of having
been with Yagna in her bedchamber!”</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka had not yet gone to bed, and was spinning when
he came in; but he told her nothing. In the morning he
stopped away from work, feeling sure they had turned him
<span class="pageno" id="Page_67">67</span>away. But he had scarcely breakfasted when the miller
came in.</p>

<p class="c004">“Come and work. Your quarrel with Matthew is your
own business: I have naught to do with it. But the sawmill
must go on working as before, till he is well.—You
will now be overseer, and have four <i>zloty</i> a day and dinner.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I do not accept. Give me what you gave Matthew, then
I will: and do his work as well as he.”</p>

<p class="c004">The miller flew in a rage, and wanted to bargain, but he
was obliged to give in: what else could he do? He took
him on at once, and walked away.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka, who had been told nothing of what had occurred,
was much puzzled at all this.</p>
<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_68">68</span>
  <!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER IV</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">Since daybreak on Christmas Eve, the whole village
was in a state of feverish excitement and bustling
activity.</p>

<p class="c004">It had again frozen during the night, and as the frost
came after a couple of mild days and damp fogs, the trees
were all covered over with a moss-like growth of glassy
crystals. The sun had come out of the clouds, and shone
in a clear blue sky, with only the thinnest and most transparent
veil of haze; but it shone palely, coldly, like the
Host in the Monstrance, warming nothing. The frost had
grown harder as the day advanced, and of such severity
and penetration that it almost took the breath away, and
raised a cloud of condensed vapour round every living being.
Yet the world was steeped in bright sunshine, and
radiant with glittering splendour; on every side the sparkling
snow seemed oversprinkled with a dew of diamond-like
scintillation. The surrounding fields, buried under
their white pall, lay refulgent, but dead. Now and then a
bird passed, flapping over their pure expanse, while its
black shadow glided along the ground below; or a covey of
partridges clucked amongst the snow-laden bushes, with
timorous watchfulness and stealth, drawing near to the
dwellings of men and their cornstacks crammed with grain.
Elsewhere a hare would show its dark form, leaping through
the drifts, or standing on its hind legs, or gnawing to get at
the garnered corn, but—alarmed by the barking of the dogs,—scamper
back to the great forest, where every tree was
tufted with hoarfrost.</p>

<p class="c004">A keen piercing cold, luminous with glacial sheen, now
shimmered over the whole world, and plunged it in icebound
stillness.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_69">69</span>Not a single cry broke the hard silence of the country-side,
no living voice resounded, no breath of wind whispered
amongst those glistening arid fields of snow. Only at rare
intervals, from the roads half buried in the drifts, did faint-voiced
bells and the stridulous creaking of a sledge strike
the ear, so feeble and so far off that they were all but
inaudible, and no one could tell whence it came or whither
it went, ere the sound again faded into utter silence.</p>

<p class="c004">But all along the Lipka roads, on either side of the pond,
the folk were noisy and swarming. The air itself wafted
something of festive joy, and the people, nay, even the
cattle, were full of the same. Through the frozen air that
carried sound so well, there floated cries like musical tunes;
laughter out of many a merry throat echoed from one end
of the hamlet to the other, awakening like gaiety of heart;
dogs rolled madly about on the snow, and bayed with glee,
and pursued the crows that hung about the cabins; horses
whinnied in unseen stalls; and cows in their byres bellowed
tunefully. One might almost fancy that the snow crackled
more crisply and briskly underfoot, while the sledge-runners
sounded sharp along the hardened and glass-smooth roads,
and the smoke went up in blue pillars straight as arrows, and
the cabin-windows winked in the sun till they fairly dazzled
you. Noisy children were all about, and the hum of talk
was heard, and the cackling of geese that swam about in the
holes made in the ice; and people were calling, calling to
one another. On the roads, round about the homesteads and
their belongings, folk were passing everywhere; and through
the snow-whitened orchards gleamed the red petticoats of
women going from hut to hut and, as they went and grazed
the trees or shrubs, receiving a shower of silvery dust.</p>

<p class="c004">On this day, even the mill did not clatter. Indeed, it
was silent during the whole festival; but a pellucid ice-cold
stream, led out by the sluices, ran with babbling
melody; and beyond this, somewhere far away, the cries of
a flock of wild ducks, wheeling in the air, arose from
marshes and moors.</p>

<p class="c004">Every cabin—Machek’s, Simon’s, the Voyt’s, and who can
<span class="pageno" id="Page_70">70</span>say how many more?—was now being aired and scoured and
scrubbed, and the rooms, the passages, and even the snow
in front of the huts, were strewn with fresh pine-needles; in
some dwellings the hearths, grown black and dingy, had
also been whitewashed. In all the huts they were busy
making bread, especially the <i>strucle</i>, or wheaten bread, with
poppy-seed-sprinkled crust; and this seed was also being
pounded in mortars for other much-liked dainties.</p>

<p class="c004">Yes, Yule-tide was at hand: the feast of the Divine Child,
the joyful day of wondrous goodwill to men; the blessed
respite from the long never-ending round of labour, to
arouse the souls of men from their wintry torpor, and shake
off the grey dullness of everyday life, and make them go
forward joyfully and with a glad thrill of the heart, to meet
the day of our Lord’s Nativity.</p>

<p class="c004">At Boryna’s, too, the same activity, and quick going to
and fro, and bustling preparation, prevailed as elsewhere.</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna himself had been in town since the morning, to
make purchases. Pete, a man whom he had taken as
groom after Kuba’s death, accompanied him.</p>

<p class="c004">They all were very busy inside the cabin. Yuzka, humming
a tune, was cutting out of coloured paper some of those
curious figures which they stick for decoration either on the
beams or on the picture-frames, making them look as if
painted in brilliant colours. Yagna, her sleeves turned up
almost to her shoulders, was kneading in the trough with
her mother’s aid; now preparing the long <i>strucle</i>, and loaves
of the finest flour (she was hurrying, for the dough had
already risen, and she had to fashion the loaves instantly);
now casting an eye on Yuzka’s work; now seeing to the
honey-and-cheese-cakes, that were rising under warm coverings,
and awaiting their turn for the baking-oven; and now
flying round to where the fire roared up the chimney.</p>

<p class="c004">Vitek had been ordered to see to the fire and keep it well
fed with logs; but they had seen him only at breakfast:
afterwards, where was he?—Both Yagna and Dominikova
looked for him about the premises, and called him, but in
vain; he never answered. The naughty lad was away beyond
<span class="pageno" id="Page_71">71</span>the haystack, out in the fields, under the bushes where
he was setting snares to catch partridges, and covering these
over with thick layers of chaff, both to conceal them, and
as a bait. Lapa accompanied him, and also Bociek, the
stork that he had taken care of, and healed, and fed, and
taught a number of tricks, and made such a friend of that
he had only to whistle in a peculiar manner for it to come
to him as obediently as Lapa—with whom, besides, it got on
in perfect harmony, and they used to hunt rats together in
the stable.</p>

<p class="c004">Roch, whom Boryna had taken to his home for the
holidays, had been and was still in church, where, in company
with Ambrose, he had spent the morning decorating the
altar and the walls with pine-branches that the priest’s
servant brought to them.</p>

<p class="c004">It was near noon when Yagna had finished kneading all
the loaves, and was now placing them on a board, patting
them into shape, and daubing them over with white of egg,
lest they should crack in the oven. Just then Vitek came in,
crying out: “They are bringing us the Kolendy!”</p>

<p class="c004">Since early dawn, Yanek, the organist’s eldest son—the
one who was at school—had been taking altar-breads round,
in company with his younger brother.</p>

<p class="c004">When they came in, and said: “Praised be Jesus Christ!”
Yagna turned and saw them.</p>

<p class="c004">She was greatly confused at the room being in such disorder
and, hiding her bare arms beneath her apron, asked
them to sit down and rest, as they had heavy baskets, and
the younger one bore several packages besides.</p>

<p class="c004">They said they could not. “We have still to go over
half the village, and but little time for that.”</p>

<p class="c004">“At least stay awhile, Mr. Yanek, and warm yourself: it
is so bitterly cold!”</p>

<p class="c004">“And,” Dominikova proposed, “perhaps you will both
take a little hot milk.”</p>

<p class="c004">They made excuses, but at last rested themselves close to
the window. Yanek was unable to take his eyes off Yagna,
till she hurriedly pulled her sleeves down over her arms:
<span class="pageno" id="Page_72">72</span>at which he turned crimson like a beetroot, and fumbled in
his basket for the altar-breads. He took out the finest and
largest packet, in a gilt paper wrapper, and containing
several coloured wafers, also shaped like altar-breads.
Yagna, holding her hands under her apron, took the packet,
laid it on a plate beneath the crucifix, and then brought
him a good gallon measure of linseed, and six eggs.</p>

<p class="c004">“Have you been back here long, Mr. Yanek?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Only three days: since Sunday.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Is not that book-learning a very tedious thing?” Dominikova
inquired.</p>

<p class="c004">“Not very; but then it is only to last till spring.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Your mother told me—I remember ’twas on my wedding-day—you
were going to prepare for the priesthood.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, I—I am.—After Eastertide,” he answered, in a low
tone and with downcast eyes.</p>

<p class="c004">“Lord, what a consolation that will be to your parents!
To have a priest in the family! And what an honour to
the parish!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Have you any news?”</p>

<p class="c004">“None; and that is good news. Everything goes on
quietly with us, as is usual amongst farmers.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yagna, I should willingly have come over for your
wedding, but they would not let me.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh,” Yuzka exclaimed, “what a merry-making that was!
Why, there was dancing for three days running!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Kuba died then, I am told.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, he did, poor wretch! Lost so much blood, he passed
away before the priest came to shrive him. They say in the
village that his soul is doing penance—that there is now
some creature wandering about and groaning by night along
the ways and where four roads meet, and hard by crosses,
waiting for God to have mercy on it. It must be Kuba’s
soul: whose else?”</p>

<p class="c004">“What is this you say?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Naught but the truth. I myself have seen nothing, and
so cannot swear to it. But there may be things in the
world that man’s mind is unable to see through, no matter
<span class="pageno" id="Page_73">73</span>how keen. For these are the works of God, not of man.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I am sorry Kuba died. The priest himself wept when
he told me.”</p>

<p class="c004">“A most upright servant he was: quiet, religious, hard-working,
never taking what was not his, and always ready
to share his last garment with a poor man.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Continual changes in Lipka. Every time I come back
here, I find things quite altered.—I was at Antek’s to-day.
His children are ill, misery is knocking at their door, and
he himself is so changed, so thin, I hardly knew him.”</p>

<p class="c004">To these words there was no answer. Yagna quickly
turned her face away, and set about putting the loaves on
the shovel, whilst her mother darted him such a glance that
he felt he had touched on an unpleasant subject. With a wish
to mend matters, he was seeking to start another, when
Yuzka addressed him with a blush, and asked for some of
his coloured wafers.</p>

<p class="c004">“I want them for the ‘globes’ we hang up. We had some
from last year, but they were quite spoiled in the racket of
the wedding-feast.”</p>

<p class="c004">Certainly he would; and he gave her more than a dozen,
of five different tints.</p>

<p class="c004">“So many! O Lord! I shall have enough to make not
only ‘globes,’ but ‘moons’ too, and ‘stars’!” she cried in
great glee. Yagna whispered to her, and she came, blushing,
her apron over her face, to offer him six more eggs in
return for his gift.</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna had meanwhile returned, and came in, Lapa and
Bociek following him, along with Vitek.</p>

<p class="c004">“Shut the door this instant,” cried Dominikova, “or the
cakes will get cold!”</p>

<p class="c004">“When women set to putting things in order,” Boryna
said jocosely, as he warmed his freezing hands, “men must
seek lodgings, even at the tavern. The road was like glass,
the sledge ran splendidly, but it was so cold we were nearly
frozen in our seats.—Yagna, give Pete something to eat.
He has been nigh freezing to the marrow in his soldier’s
greatcoat.—Tell me, Yanek, are you home for long?”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_74">74</span>“Till Twelfth Night.”</p>

<p class="c004">“You must be a great help to your father, both at the
organ and in his office. It is so cold, he can hardly wish to
leave his warm bed, now that he is getting on in years!”</p>

<p class="c004">“But that’s not why he did not come to you himself:
our cow has calved to-day, and he is forced to stay and
tend her.”</p>

<p class="c004">“That’s good for you: you will have milk all the winter
through.”</p>

<p class="c004">“How now, Vitek, have you watered the colt?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I have myself,” said Yagna, “but it would not drink at
all, only frisked about; and it teased the mare so, I had to
take it away to the biggest stall.”</p>

<p class="c004">Yanek and his brother took their leave, but the former
had his eyes fixed on Yagna to the very last: he saw she
was still more lovely than in autumn, when yet unmarried.</p>

<p class="c004">It was therefore no wonder that she had so completely
overcome her old husband, who could see nothing in the
world but her. They said truly in the village that his love
had made a dotard of him. Hard and unyielding as he was
to everyone else, Yagna could do with him whatever she
pleased; he obeyed her in everything, saw things only
through her eyes, and took her advice, and her mother’s too.
Nor had he any reason to regret the results. His farm was
in good order, everything prospered, he had every comfort,
someone to complain to and talk things over with; and his
only care in the world was now Yagna, to whom he cast up
his eyes as to some holy image.</p>

<p class="c004">Even now, whilst warming himself by the fire, he looked
lovingly in her direction, and had ready, just as before the
wedding, sweet affectionate words for her; all his thoughts
were to give her pleasure.</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna, indeed, cared as much for his love as for last
year’s snow. Just now she was moody, and out of patience
with his transports of tenderness. Everything harried her,
and she went about, angry and cold as a February wind,
throwing work on her mother, or on Yuzka, and spurring
her husband himself to exertions by some sharp word: she
<span class="pageno" id="Page_75">75</span>herself went to the other lodgings, she said, to see about the
stove, and to the stable to tend the colt; but, in reality, to be
alone and think of Antek.</p>

<p class="c004">For Yanek had reminded her of him, and now Antek was
as present to her mind’s eye as if he were there before her
in the flesh. During hard upon three months she had seen
nothing of him—except that once, when she was driving out
along the Poplar-road. Yes, time had flowed by like a
river: the wedding, the home-coming, her various occupations
and the cares of her household duties, had left her no
time to think of him. Out of sight, out of mind; and her
acquaintances had avoided all mention of his name. And
now, she knew not why, he had surged up suddenly before
her with so sad and reproachful a look that her very soul
within her was shaken and distressed.—“I have done no harm
to you,” she said within herself; “why, then, are you haunting
me thus, like a spectre, like a ghost?” And she
attempted to wrestle with her memories of the past. She
marvelled why his figure alone came back to her so—not
Matthew’s, not Staho Ploshka’s, not any of the others—only
his! Had he given her a love-charm that was now
putting her beside herself, and tormenting her with the
pangs that she felt?</p>

<p class="c004">“What is he doing now, poor fellow? what is he thinking
of?... And there is no means of having speech with him,
none!—Certainly, it is a grievous sin.—Dear Jesus! It is
a thing forbidden; so the priest told me in confession.—Oh,
but if I could only speak to him once more—speak even in
presence of a third person!—No, no: never, never, never!...
I am Boryna’s until death!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yagna!” her mother called; “do come: we have to take
the loaves out.”</p>

<p class="c004">She ran back to the house, hurrying and bustling, and
seeking to forget. But in vain: everywhere she saw his eyes,
and those black overshadowing brows of his—and those
red, red lips ... how ravenously eager, and how sweet!</p>

<p class="c004">She set to work with feverish activity, putting the place
in order; and in the evening she went to the byre, a place she
<span class="pageno" id="Page_76">76</span>scarcely ever visited. But all would not do. He was always
there—there before her.—A great craving arose within her,
tearing her heart to shreds; and her soul was so sorely
tempest-tossed that she at last came to Yuzka, sedulously at
work making “globes,” and, sitting down upon the chest by
her side, burst into a passion of tears.</p>

<p class="c004">Her mother and her husband were alarmed and sought to
calm her; they tried to soothe her as one soothes a spoiled
child; they caressed her, they looked lovingly into her eyes:
all was of no avail. She cried till she could cry no longer.
And then, suddenly, she felt a change and, rising from her
seat in a strange humour of merriment, began to talk and
laugh, and almost burst into song.</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna stared at her in wonder, and so did her mother.
Then they exchanged glances full of meaning, and went out
to whisper together in the passage. They came back gay
and joyful, and embraced and kissed her with the most tender
affection.</p>

<p class="c004">“Do not lift that kneading-trough!” exclaimed Dominikova
earnestly; “you must not. Matthias will do that for
you!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, I have often lifted and carried many a heavier
thing!”</p>

<p class="c004">She did not understand.</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna would not let her touch the trough; he carried it
himself. And a little later, when she was in the bedroom,
he took the opportunity of taking her in his arms and telling
her something that Yuzka was not to hear.</p>

<p class="c004">“Both mother’s head and yours are turned! What you
suppose is not the case: you are both wrong.”</p>

<p class="c004">“These are things that we know something about, and
there is no mistake here.—Let me see. It is Yule-tide now....
Then—then it will be only in July.—Dear, dear! in
harvest-time!—Yet let us thank God that it has come to
pass in any case.” He would have embraced her again, but
she shrank away from him in a temper, and ran to her
mother to protest. The old dame, however, asserted that
there was no mistake.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_77">77</span>“There is, there is! ’tis naught but your fancy!” Yagna
cried in hot denial.</p>

<p class="c004">“You are not glad of this, it seems?”</p>

<p class="c004">“And why should I be glad? Have we not enough
troubles, without this too thrown in?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Do not complain, or the Lord will punish you!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Let Him, let Him!”</p>

<p class="c004">“But what have you to complain of?”</p>

<p class="c004">“That I do not wish it: that is all!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Look, Yagna: if you have a child, then, in the case of
your husband’s death (which Heaven forfend!) it would
have an equal part with the other children as his heir;
and possibly all the land might come to it in the end....”</p>

<p class="c004">“Land, land, land! Ye think of naught else; and to me
it is naught!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Because you’re as yet a silly child, and your head is full
of nonsense. A man without land is like a man without
legs: he crawls about and cannot get anywhere.—But, at
any rate, say nothing of this to Matthias; it would vex him.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I shall say whatever I like. What do I care for him?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Then do so, if you are such a fool; yes, tell everybody
about it!—Go rather, set to work; take the herrings out
of the water to soak them in milk; it will make them less
salt. And tell Yuzka to pound some more poppy-seed;
there is yet much work, and the day is far spent.”</p>

<p class="c004">So it was. Evening approached, the sun had sunk behind
the forest; its setting glow stretched along the sky in blood-red
streaks, and all the snows were fiery and as if oversprinkled
with live coals. The hamlet had quieted down.
Folk were still fetching water from the pond, and chopping
firewood; at times sledges went past like a whirlwind, men
ran across the pond, gates creaked on their hinges, and
voices were heard here and there; but the movement was
slowing down as the fires of sunset died out: with the pallid
livid hues now overspreading the plain, the quiet also
spread, the land sank to rest, and the ways had fewer and
fewer passers-by. The far-off fields now lost in murky
darkness, the winter evening reigned over the country; the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_78">78</span>cold increased, the snow crackled louder underfoot, and all
the panes were embellished with frost-patterns and fantastic
traceries.</p>

<p class="c004">Slowly the village was vanishing in grey snowy shadows,
melting away; neither huts nor fences nor orchards could
be made out; only a few lights twinkled, more thick than
usual, because everyone was busy preparing the meal of
Christmas Eve.</p>

<p class="c004">In every cabin, from the richest to the very poorest of
all, preparations were being zealously made; in each family
room, at the corner next the east, they had placed a sheaf
of corn; the tables were strewn with hay beneath bleached
linen napery; and they looked out eagerly through the windows
for the appearance of the first star.</p>

<p class="c004">The sky, as is often the case when it freezes, was not
very clear when evening began to fall; it had seemed to veil
itself as soon as the last glow had burned out, and was
hidden in the gloom of many a dusky wreath.</p>

<p class="c004">Yuzka and Vitek, terribly chilled, were standing outside
the porch, on the watch for the appearance of the first star.</p>

<p class="c004">“There it is!” Vitek suddenly exclaimed. “There it is!”</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna and the others, and Roch last of them all, came
out to see.</p>

<p class="c004">Yes, it was there, and just in the east, having pierced
through the sombre curtains which hung round about it: it
shone forth from the dark-blue depths, and seemed to grow
larger as they gazed upon it; gleaming brighter and brighter,
nearer and nearer, till Roch knelt down in the snow, and the
others after him.</p>

<p class="c004">“Lo, ’tis the star of the Three Wise Men,” he said; “the
Star of Bethlehem, in whose gleaming our Lord was born.—Blessed
be His Holy Name!”</p>

<p class="c004">These words they piously repeated after him, gazing up
with eager eyes at the bright far-off witness of the miraculous
Birth—the visible token of God’s mercy, visiting the
world.</p>

<p class="c004">Their hearts throbbed with tender gratitude and glowing
faith, while they received and absorbed into their hearts
<span class="pageno" id="Page_79">79</span>that pure light, the sacred fire—the sacrament to fight with
and to overcome all evil!</p>

<p class="c004">And the star, seeming to grow larger still, rose up like a
ball of fire, from which beams of azure brightness shot down
like the spokes of a mystic wheel, darting its rays upon the
snows, and twinkling with radiant victory over darkness.
Then after it there came forth other stars, its faithful
attendants, peering out in innumerably dense multitudes—filling
all the heavens, covering them with a dew of light,
and making them, as it were, a mantle of dark azure, strewn
with silver motes.</p>

<p class="c004">“And now that the Word is made Flesh,” said Roch, “it
is time to take our meal.”</p>

<p class="c004">They went in, and took seats for supper at a high long
bench.</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna occupied the first place, then Dominikova and
her sons (for they had arranged to eat together); Roch sat
in the middle, Pete, Vitek, and Yuzka after him, and Yagna
at the very end; for she had to see about the service.</p>

<p class="c004">The family room was now in utter and solemn silence.</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna, having made the sign of the Cross, divided an
altar-bread with each of those present, and all partook of
it with reverence, as representing the Bread of Life.</p>

<p class="c004">“Christ,” then said Roch, “was born at this hour; therefore
let every creature feed upon this holy bread!”</p>

<p class="c004">And though they had eaten all day long only a little
dry bread, and were very hungry, they all ate slowly and
with due decorum.</p>

<p class="c004">The first dish consisted of sour beetroot soup, with
mushrooms and potatoes in it. After this came herrings,
rolled in flour and fried in oil. Then there was a dish of
cabbage and mushrooms, also seasoned with oil. And, to
crown the feast, Yagna had prepared a most dainty dish—buckwheat
meal, mixed with honey and fried in oil of
poppy-seed! With all these dishes, they ate common dry
bread: it was not becoming, on such a great fast-day, to
eat either cakes or <i>strucle</i>, these containing butter or milk.</p>

<p class="c004">They ate for a considerable time, and there was but
<span class="pageno" id="Page_80">80</span>little conversation; only spoons clattered and lips were
smacked. Boryna wanted to get up and help Yagna, but
her mother would not have it.</p>

<p class="c004">“Let her be,” she said; “it will do her no harm. ’Tis the
first Yule-tide at which she presides; she must learn and
accustom herself.”</p>

<p class="c004">Lapa, whimpering at times, was poking its head against
thighs and knees, fawning and wagging its tail, in hope of
getting sooner fed. Bociek the stork, whose place was in
the passage, ever and anon pecked at the wall, or uttered
its <i>klek-klek-klek</i>, to which the hens at roost responded.</p>

<p class="c004">The meal was not over yet, when someone tapped at the
window.</p>

<p class="c004">Dominikova cried out: “Let no one in, no, nor even
look that way! It is the Evil One: he will enter, and then
stay here all the year round!”</p>

<p class="c004">The spoons dropped, and they listened in dismay, as the
tapping was repeated.</p>

<p class="c004">“It is Kuba’s soul!” Yuzka whispered.</p>

<p class="c004">“Say no foolish things: someone in need is there. On this
day, none should suffer hunger, or be without a roof over
him.” So saying, Roch got up and opened the door.</p>

<p class="c004">It was Yagustynka, standing humbly on the threshold,
who wept abundantly, and begged to be let in.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, give me but a corner, and what you leave your dog!
Have pity on a poor old woman!... I was waiting for my
children to ask me; I waited in vain, starved with cold in my
hut.... O Lord! I am now a beggar-woman; and they
leave me here, forlorn, without a morsel of bread—worse
off than a dog!... And their cabin is full of people and
of noise. I crept thither, looked round the corner and in
at the window.... It was all of no use.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Well, sit ye down with us. Better had it been to come
when evening fell, and not expect favours from your children.—They
will rejoice when they drive a last nail into
your coffin, to make sure you will not come back to them.”
Thus Boryna spoke, and very kindly made a place for her
by his side.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_81">81</span>But she was unable to eat anything, however heartily
Yagna, the least stingy of housewives, pressed her to take
some food. It was impossible; she sat drooping, bent,
crouching, taciturn, her trembling body showing how much
she suffered.</p>

<p class="c004">The place was now cosy and quiet, pervaded by an
atmosphere of kindliness and of solemn piety, as if the Holy
Child were lying in the midst of them.</p>

<p class="c004">A huge fire, continually supplied with fresh fuel, was
droning up the chimney, lighting the whole apartment;
against its blaze the glazed images shone dazzlingly, the
panes loomed black in the night. And now they seated
themselves in front of the fire, on the long bench, and talked
together in hushed and serious tones.</p>

<p class="c004">Presently Yagna made coffee, with plenty of sugar in it,
which they sipped at leisure.</p>

<p class="c004">After a pause, Roch took out a book, round which he
had wound his rosary, and began to read to them in a low
voice that was full of deep emotion:</p>

<p class="c004">“Lo, a new thing hath come to pass to-day: a Virgin
hath brought forth a Son: our Lord hath in the town of
Bethlehem, not least of Judah’s cities, entered this our
world in poverty, within a wretched byre, on hay, amongst
the cattle, which were all His brethren on this night. And
that same star, which now is gleaming, gleamed upon the
Child, showing the way unto the Three Wise Men: who,
albeit black and heathens, yet were kind of heart, and
came from far-off lands, across wide rolling seas with gifts;
and thus bore witness to the Truth....”</p>

<p class="c004">He continued reading a long time and his voice took the
intonations of a prayer, almost of a chant or the singing of
some holy litany. They listened to him in pious stillness,
their souls silent and attentive, their hearts thrilling under
the fascination of the miraculous, with the sincerest gratitude
to God for the favours conferred upon them.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, sweet Jesus! Didst Thou then deign to be born
in a stable, in that far-off country, amongst filthy Jews and
cruel heretics—and in such poverty—and in such wintry
<span class="pageno" id="Page_82">82</span>frost! O poor, poor Holy One, O sweet Child!”—Such
were their thoughts, and their bosoms throbbed with pity,
and their souls flew away like birds, over land and sea, to
the place of the Nativity, to the Manger and the Crib over
which the Angels sang—and to the Sacred Feet of the
Child Jesus. There they fell, with all the might of their
fiery faith and trust in Him; and they surrendered themselves
to Him—His faithful servants for ever and ever.
Amen!</p>

<p class="c004">As Roch went on reading, Yuzka, who was a good, kind,
impressionable girl, fell to weeping copiously over our Lord’s
unhappy lot. Yagna, too, wept with her face in her hands
and her head hidden behind Andrew, who was listening close
by, with mouth wide open, and so greatly struck by what
he heard, that he repeatedly pulled Simon by his sleeve, saying:
“Lo! do you hear that, Simon?”</p>

<p class="c004">When it was over, some remarks were dropped:</p>

<p class="c004">“Poor Child! not even a cradle!”</p>

<p class="c004">“I marvel that He did not freeze.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And that our Lord was willing to bear so much pain.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Because,” Roch answered, “it was only by His sufferings
and sacrifice that He could save His people: which had He
not done, Satan would assuredly have been master of the
world and lord of every soul.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Of this and these he is pretty much master and lord as
it is,” Yagustynka muttered.</p>

<p class="c004">“Sin is master, wickedness lord; and these are the helpers
of Satan.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, well, whosoever it may be, one thing is sure: an ill
fate has power over man.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Speak not thus, lest ye sin: ye are blinded by wrath
against your children.”</p>

<p class="c004">The rebuke was stern, and she did not dispute its justice.
The others also were silent, and Simon rose to withdraw;
but his mother, attentive to everything, noticed him.</p>

<p class="c004">“Wither away so fast?” she hissed.</p>

<p class="c004">“Out—I feel too hot in here,” he faltered, taken aback.</p>

<p class="c004">“Going to Nastka—to divert yourself, hey?”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_83">83</span>“Would ye forbid, or hold me back?” he growled, but
threw his cap back on to the chest where it had been.</p>

<p class="c004">“Return with Andrew to our hut: we have left the place
to the care of Providence. See to the kine, and stay there
for me; when I have rejoined you, we shall all go together to
church.” These were her orders; but as the lads were slow
to obey, she did not repeat them; rising at once, she took
an altar-bread from the table.</p>

<p class="c004">“Vitek, light the lantern; we are going to the kine. In
this Yule-tide night, all the animals understand what men
say, because our Lord was born in their midst. And whosoever
shall, being without sin, speak unto them then, him
will they answer with a human voice: this day they are the
equals of man, and they are our fellows. And therefore
we shall go and share the altar-bread with them.”</p>

<p class="c004">All made for the byre, Vitek leading, lantern in hand.</p>

<p class="c004">The cows were lying in a row, leisurely chewing the cud;
but the approach of the lantern and the voices caused them
to snort and scramble heavily to their feet, turning their
great heads away from the light.</p>

<p class="c004">“You, Yagna, are mistress here; it is yours to divide this
bread amongst them: so will they thrive and not take any
sickness. But let them not be milked till to-morrow evening,
or they will give no more milk at all.”</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna broke an altar-bread into five pieces, made the
sign of the cross over each cow between her horns, and laid
the thin bit of wafer upon her broad rough tongue.</p>

<p class="c004">Yuzka wanted to know whether the horses were also to
get their share of the bread.</p>

<p class="c004">“It must not be; there were no horses in the byre where
Christ was born.”</p>

<p class="c004">When they had returned, Roch spoke thus:</p>

<p class="c004">“Every being, every meanest blade of grass, every little
pebble, nay, even the star that is all but unseen to the eye—everything
feels to-day, everything knows that the Lord is
born.”</p>

<p class="c004">“My God!” Yagna exclaimed. “What! even clods and
stones?”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_84">84</span>“I speak sooth: it is so. Everything has its soul. All
beings in the world have feeling, and await the hour when
Jesus, taking pity on them, shall say:</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Awake, O soul, and live, and merit Heaven!’—Yes, and
the tiniest worm, the swaying grass even, can after its fashion
have merit, and praise the Lord in its own way....
And to-night, of all nights in the year, they all rise up, full
of life, and listen, waiting for His Word!</p>

<p class="c004">“And to some it comes now, but to others not yet: they
lie patient in the dark, expecting the dawn; stones, waterdrops,
clods, trees, and whatever God has appointed each
of them to be!”</p>

<p class="c004">Mute, they all pondered over the words he said; for he
had spoken, and in sapient wise, and words which touched
the heart. Yet both Boryna and Dominikova had doubts as
to the truth of these; and, much as they turned them over
and over in their minds, they could not clear up the matter.
For, though God’s Omnipotence was indeed marvellous and
beyond all thought, still—that everything should have a
soul!—this was what they could not grasp. But now, the
smith having come in with his family, they set these thoughts
aside.</p>

<p class="c004">“We shall sit up with you, Father, and then go together
to midnight mass,” he said.</p>

<p class="c004">“Sit down,” said Boryna; “it will be more pleasant with
you. We shall be all together, save for Gregory.”</p>

<p class="c004">Yuzka looked indignantly at her father, for she thought
of Antek: but she durst not say anything.</p>

<p class="c004">Once more they took their seats on benches by the fire;
but Pete went out into the yard to chop firewood against
the coming great Day of Rest, Vitek taking the chopped
wood in his arms and piling it up in the passage.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah! but I had forgotten!” cried the smith. “The Voyt
ran and asked me to tell Dominikova she was to come at
once; for his wife is in travail and screams so that she is
likely to be confined this very night.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I would have liked to go to church with you all; but
since you say she screams, I must look in.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_85">85</span>Having whispered with the smith’s wife, she hastened
away, for she was an expert in these matters, and to many
had done more good than the doctors.</p>

<p class="c004">Various legends relating to the day were told by Roch:
one of them was as follows:</p>

<p class="c004">“Long ago—as many years back as from now to Christ’s
Birth—a certain wealthy husbandman was walking home
from market, where he had sold a couple of fatted calves,
and had the money concealed in one of his boots. He bore
a stout cudgel and was stout himself—perhaps the strongest
fellow in his village. But he was in a hurry to get home
ere nightfall, because in those days thieves used to hide in
the woods and waylay true men.</p>

<p class="c004">“This must have been in summer, for the greenwood was
fragrant and resounded with many a sweet song; a mighty
wind rocked the trees, and there was an uproarious rustling
overhead. Now, therefore, the man went along in haste,
looking around him and fearing. But he saw only young
and old pines and oaks standing side by side, and never a
living soul. Yet he feared, for he was approaching a cross,
and close by was so dense a thicket, the eye could not see
to pierce it: there thieves were mostly wont to hide. So
he crossed himself and, saying prayers in a loud voice, ran
on as fast as he could.</p>

<p class="c004">“He had without hurt passed out of the wood of tall trees,
and had gone through the undergrowth of dwarf pines and
of juniper-bushes. Already he could see the green of the
open country, hear the streamlets babbling and gurgling
along and the lark singing on high; and he noted men
ploughing and flocks of storks winging their way over the
marshes; nay, he had even caught the scent of the cherry-orchards
in blossom: when out of the last of the thickets the
robbers came leaping upon him! They were twelve, all
armed with knives. Bravely he fought, and though they
soon overpowered him, he would not give up his money, and
shrieked for help. So they threw him down, put their knees
on his chest, and were going to slay him. Suddenly, they
were all struck motionless, and remained so—bending over
<span class="pageno" id="Page_86">86</span>him, knives in air, full of rage, but, as it were, turned to
stone!—And at that same instant all things around also became
still as death. The birds, silent, floated moveless in
air—the streams rested—the sun rolled on no more—the wind
fell dead—the trees remained as they were bent by the wind—and
the corn also. And the storks seemed fixed in the
sky, with outstretched wings ... and the ploughman remained
with whip raised over his horse where it stood ...
and the whole region, as if terror-struck, became immobile
like a picture.</p>

<p class="c004">“How long this lasted, none can tell, but it endured until
men heard upon earth the Angels’ chant:</p>
<div class="lg-container-l c012">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">‘Christ comes: fear Him, O ye mighty!’</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c013">when immediately all things began to move again. But
the thieves took the warning given them by this prodigy, and
released their victim; and they went together, following the
voices they heard, to the stable; there they paid homage to
the new-born Babe, along with all the creatures which lived
on earth or in air.”</p>

<p class="c004">They wondered much at the legend told them; but presently
Boryna and the smith began to talk of other matters.</p>

<p class="c004">After a time, too, Yagustynka, who had all the time sat
silent, spoke out, and with no pleasant words.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, ye talk, ye talk, ye talk: and wherefore, but only to
make time pass? Were it true that of old there came from
heaven those who protected the wretched and saved them
from the oppressor: then why do they not come now too?
Is there now less of poverty, less of misery, less of torture
and of pain? Man is like a poor bird, unarmed, and let
loose to fly about the world. The hawk, the beasts of prey,
and want of food slay it; and him Crossbones always takes
in the end.—And ye prate of mercy, and feed fools with
promises, deluding them and saying that salvation is at hand!—Ah,
who is at hand?—Antichrist! and he will deal out
justice, and He will have mercy, even as the hawk has mercy
on the chickens!”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_87">87</span>Roch started up. “Woman!” he cried in a thundering
voice; “do not blaspheme! do not hearken sinfully to the
whispers of the Wicked One, that will drag you down to your
damnation and to everlasting fire!”—But he fell back upon
the bench, and could speak no more for the sobs that
choked his voice, and shuddered from head to foot with
horror and with sorrow for that lost soul. And when somewhat
calmer, he set the truth before her with all the power
of a firm believer, striving to bring her back into the right
way.</p>

<p class="c004">He spoke to her long—very long; and as well as a priest
in the pulpit.</p>

<p class="c004">Meanwhile Vitek, having been greatly struck to hear that
cattle possessed human speech on Christmas Eve, called
Yuzka away quietly, and they went both of them to the
cow-house.</p>

<p class="c004">Holding each other by the hands, trembling with awe,
and crossing themselves more than once, they slipped in
amongst the cows.</p>

<p class="c004">Down they knelt by the side of the largest one, that they
looked on as the Mother of the Byre. Out of breath, agitated,
with tears in their eyes and dread in their hearts, as
if they were in church and during the Elevation—they nevertheless
were upheld by strong trust and a lively faith. Vitek
put his mouth to her ear, and quavered in a low voice:</p>

<p class="c004">“Hist! Grey One! Grey One!”</p>

<p class="c004">But she only gurgled inaudibly, and went on chewing with
a roll of her tongue and a smack of her lips.</p>

<p class="c004">“Something strange has come upon her: she answers
naught!”</p>

<p class="c004">Then they knelt by the next cow, and Vitek, who by this
time was on the verge of weeping, called earnestly to her:</p>

<p class="c004">“Spotted One! Spotted One!”</p>

<p class="c004">They both approached very close to her mouth, and listened,
holding their breath; but never, never a word!</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah! no doubt we have sinned, so we shall not hear her
speak. They answer only such as are sinless; and we are
sinners!”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_88">88</span>“True, Yuzka, true! we are sinful, we have sinned. O
Lord! so it is! Aye, I stole some bits of string from master
once. And an old strap besides.... Yes, and also....”
He could go no farther; remorse and repentance for his faults
shook the lad with a convulsion of tears and sobs; and
Yuzka, following his example, wept from the bottom of her
heart. They cried together, and would not be comforted till
they had laid bare before each other all their “manifold
sins and offences.”</p>

<p class="c004">At home, no one remarked their absence, for all were piously
singing hymns—not Christmas carols, which it was
not deemed proper to strike up until after midnight.</p>

<p class="c004">On the other side of the house, Pete was having a wash
and making a grand toilet. He had completely changed
his clothes, Yagna having brought him another suit of his,
that he had put by in the store-room.</p>

<p class="c004">But what a cry arose when he appeared before them, clad—no
longer in his military cloak and grey uniform—but in
the usual garb of a peasant!</p>

<p class="c004">“They laughed at me and nicknamed me Grey Dog,” he
faltered; “so I have changed my clothes.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Change your speech, and not your garments!” Yagustynka
snarled.</p>

<p class="c004">“That likewise he will get back, since his soul has remained
Polish.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And what marvel if he should forget something, after five
years far away, never once hearing his mother-tongue
spoken?”</p>

<p class="c004">Here they broke off their talk; the high-pitched tinkle of
the mass-bell was now heard in the chamber.</p>

<p class="c004">“We must be off: it is ringing for the shepherd’s mass!”</p>

<p class="c004">And in a very short time all had set out, save Yagustynka.
She stayed to watch the house, and still more to loose the
reins in solitude to the bitterness of her heart.</p>

<p class="c004">The mass-bell meantime rang, rang, rang, like the quick
twitter of a bird, calling them to church.</p>

<p class="c004">Out of their cabins they poured; now and then a ruddy
refulgence shone from the opening and closing doors, with a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_89">89</span>flash as of lightning. In some huts, the fire was put out or
covered. In the dark night, as they hurried on, a voice
would be heard, or a cough, and the crunching of shoes on
the snow, and the holy words of mutual greeting: and on
they went, deeper and deeper into the dark-grey blackness,
till only their footsteps sounded in the frozen air.</p>

<p class="c004">From afar they now began to perceive the glowing church-windows,
and the great door thrown open and pouring forth
light, and the people surging in—billows on billows, slowly
filling the aisle, decorated with Christmas trees of many a
kind; crowded along the white walls, swarming in front of
the altar, filling the pews in an ever-rising flood, rolling and
undulating to and fro with the incoming human tide, which
brought in along with it a fog of condensed breath-vapour,
so thick that the altar-lights shone dim and scarcely seen
through its folds.</p>

<p class="c004">And still the people came in, came in continually.</p>

<p class="c004">They arrived from Polne Rudki in a compact mass, great
tall fellows, ponderous, yet active, all flaxen-haired, all clad
in blue-black capotes; their women comely, every one of
them, adorned with “double” aprons, and having for headgear
caps underneath red kerchiefs.</p>

<p class="c004">Next came in straggling knots of twos and threes, the men
of Modlitsa: poor sickly wretches, strengthless creatures, in
grey patched capotes, and all bearing sticks, for they had
come on foot. Of these the common tavern joke was that
they lived on mud-fishes only, because their lands were
miry and intersected with marshes, and their garments smelt
of the peat they used for fuel.</p>

<p class="c004">From Vola, too, came some, by separate families, like the
juniper-bushes that always grow in thick clumps and close
together: none of them tall, but all of middle height, stumpy
and not unlike sacks of corn, yet lively fellows: great
talkers, most stubbornly litigious, given to fighting, and
spoilers of the forests. They were in grey capotes, with
facings of black braid, and red girdles.</p>

<p class="c004">There, too, was the “nobility” of Rzepki, which, as evil
tongues say, “has only a bag and a bundle, one cow for five
<span class="pageno" id="Page_90">90</span>and one cap for three”; they came all in one band, taciturn,
looking down and askance at everyone they met. Their
womenfolk, dressed like manor-people, very much pranked
out, very handsome, white of complexion and voluble of
tongue, walked in their midst, and were treated by them with
the utmost courtesy.</p>

<p class="c004">Directly after them entered the men of Przylek, tall,
slender and strong as trees in a pine-forest, and so decked
out as to make the eye water: white capotes, red waistcoats,
shirts adorned with green ribbons, breeches striped with
yellow bands; and they pushed forwards, giving way to no
one, till they got quite close to the altar.</p>

<p class="c004">And then, almost the last of all, like so many squires, in
walked the people of Debie. They were but few; each went
apart from the others, strutting proudly forwards, and took
his place in the pews next to the high altar, having precedence
of everyone; self-confident, because wealthy. Their
womenfolk carried prayer-books, and wore white caps tied
under the chin, and jackets of dark-coloured cloth.—And
then there were also men from the more remote hamlets,
from many a little cluster of huts, from sawmills, and from
manors too—but who could count them all?</p>

<p class="c004">And in this multitude, pressed and surging and rustling
like a wood in a breeze, the white capotes of the Lipka men
and their women’s red kerchiefs were conspicuous.</p>

<p class="c004">The church was full, even to the very last place in the
porch, and anyone who came late had to pray outside under
the trees in the cold.</p>

<p class="c004">Now the priest began the first mass, and the organ pealed
forth, while all the people swayed to and fro, and bowed
down, and knelt before the Divine Majesty.</p>

<p class="c004">There was a deep hush; fervent prayers went up; every
eye was fixed on the priest, and on the one taper that burned
high above and in the middle of the altar. The organ played
soft music, fugues and harmonies so touchingly sweet that
they sent a thrill to the very heart. At times the priest
turned to the people with outstretched hands, uttering aloud
certain sacred Latin words; and the people too extended their
<span class="pageno" id="Page_91">91</span>arms, sighing audibly, and, bending down in deep contrition,
struck their breasts and prayed with fervour.</p>

<p class="c004">Then, when the first mass was over, the priest mounted
the pulpit, spoke of the sacred festival, and exhorted them
to flee all things evil: his words went to their hearts like fire,
and sounded like thunder through the church. Of his hearers,
some sighed, some beat their breasts; others were sharply
stung by remorse, and others again—those in particular who
were of amatory disposition—fell a-weeping. For the priest
spoke with true zeal and eloquence, his words went straight
to the heart and mind; and however drowsy the heat in the
church had made more than one, even these could not but
listen to him.</p>

<p class="c004">Just before the second mass, the organ pealed out again,
and the priest intoned the famous carol:</p>

<div class="lg-container-l c012">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“Come to meet Him—come to greet Him!”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c013">and the people started up from their knees as one man, with
a billowing swirl, took up the tune, and roared in unison,
with a loud blast from each man’s lungs:</p>

<div class="lg-container-l c012">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“Jesus in the manger laid!”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c004">The Christmas trees vibrated and shook with the din,
and the lights flickered in the enormous volume of sound.</p>

<p class="c004">So united were they, in souls and faith and voices, that
it seemed as if a giant were trolling forth that tremendous
chant that rolled, carrying every heart along with it, to the
sacred feet of the Divine Child!</p>

<p class="c004">When the second mass was over, the organist struck up
one Christmas carol after another, and to such lively leaping
measures that it was all they could do to hold back from
leaping too; but at any rate they all turned round to the
organ-loft, and shouted the words in tune and time with the
music.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek alone was not singing with the others. He had
come with his wife and with Staho’s family, but had let
them go on before him, he himself standing close to the pews.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_92">92</span>He had no mind to take his old place among the farmers in
front of the altar, and was looking for a place somewhere
else, when he perceived his father coming in with all his
family, pushing forward to the centre of the nave, with
Yagna going first of them all.</p>

<p class="c004">He shrank back behind a young fir-tree, and thenceforward
never took his eyes off her. She sat down at the end of a
pew close to the side gangway; and he, unconsciously obeying
instinct, pressed forward with stubborn jostling, till he
was close to her; and when all knelt down during mass, he too
knelt and bent forward so that his head touched her knees.</p>

<p class="c004">She at first took no notice of him: the rushlight she was
using to read by shed so faint a glimmer round, and the fir
boughs concealed him so well that he could not be seen. It
was only at the Elevation, when, going down on her knees,
she beat her breast and bowed her head in adoration, that
she happened to look in his direction—and her heart suddenly
stopped beating, and she was petrified with joy.</p>

<p class="c004">She durst not look a second time. What she had seen was
but a dream to her; a vision—a “false creation,” and no
more.</p>

<p class="c004">She closed her eyes and remained long on her knees, with
head bowed down, and body bent forward—almost beside
herself with excitement. At last, however, she seated herself
and looked him straight in the face.</p>

<p class="c004">Yes, it was really he—Antek—his face very haggard and
bronzed; and those eyes of his, so bold and daring, now
looked into hers with such sorrowful tenderness that her
heart was smitten through and through with affectionate apprehension,
and the tears came to her eyes.</p>

<p class="c004">Like the other women there, she sat stiffly, apparently
reading in her book in which she saw not a single letter,
nor even the page before her. What she did see was his
face—his eyes, so sad, so full of appeal, flashing, blazing,
bright as stars, coming between her and the rest of the
world. She felt lost and helpless—and he was kneeling by
her side; and she heard his quick breath and felt it hot,
and was aware of the dear, yet awful might which went forth
<span class="pageno" id="Page_93">93</span>from him, seized upon her heart, bound it to him as with
cords, thrilling her at once with pleasure and dismay—with
a vertiginous shuddering, and a cry for love so potent that
her every limb quaked, and her heart beat wildly like some
poor bird nailed in sport by the wings to a barn-door!</p>

<p class="c004">The second mass was now over, and the people were all
singing together, and praying and sighing and weeping; but
these two, as if beyond this world, heard nothing, saw nothing,
thought of nothing but each other.</p>

<p class="c004">Dread—joy—affection—remembrance—enchantment—desire!—all
these feelings alternately glowed within them,
passing from one to the other, and knitting them in one, so
that they felt themselves one being, and their two hearts
throbbed in unison, and one fire flamed in the eyes of each.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek came yet a little nearer, leaned his shoulder against
her hip (and a hot flush surged over her, and she was nigh
to swooning); and as she knelt again, he flung these words—words
that might have been brands of fire—into her ear:</p>

<p class="c004">“Yagna! Yagna!”</p>

<p class="c004">She shook, and almost fell fainting; his voice pierced her
through and through with keen rapture—with a sharp-edged
delight.</p>

<p class="c004">“Come out some evening ... come out ... behind the
haystack.... I shall be waiting there every night....
Fear not.... I must speak to you.... ’Tis urgent.—Come.”
This he said in an impassioned whisper, very close
to her—so close that his breath was like a flame upon her
face.</p>

<p class="c004">She replied nothing: the words stuck in her throat. Her
heart was palpitating so violently that she thought everyone
near her must have heard it. But she made a gesture as if
she would go that very instant where he wished, where her
love was urging her ... behind the haystack.</p>

<p class="c004">The church was resounding with the joyful thunder of
the carols, when she came a little to her senses, and looked
round at the people and the sanctuary.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek was there no more. He had withdrawn unnoticed,
and was slowly walking out into the churchyard.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_94">94</span>There he stood in the frost a long time, beneath the belfry,
that he might cool down a little and breathe some fresh air.
But his bosom was so overflowing with gladness, there was
in him such an exultation, such a triumph of power, that he
never even heard the chant that welled out from the open
church door, nor the faint echoes which repeated it from
the bells above. No, he took no heed of anything whatsoever....</p>

<p class="c004">Seizing a handful of snow, and swallowing it greedily, he
leapt over the wall and into the road—rushing away, out on
to the country-side, wayward as the blast.</p>
<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_95">95</span>
  <!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER V</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">The Boryna family returned from church very late;
and but a few minutes later, they were all in bed,
snoring loud. All except Yagna alone. Wearied
though she was, she did not fall asleep. She turned on her
pillow, she even threw the blanket over her head: it was of
no avail; sleep would not come. In its stead there came a
sort of nightmare, and fell upon her, and crushed her with
its weight. She could neither breathe, nor cry out, nor jump
from her bed. There she lay, numb, drowsy, in that half-awake
state when the mind spins out memories all the while
and goes over the world with them—rising far above the
earth, arraying itself in the sun’s splendour, and yet no more
capable of any activity in itself than is a reflection in clear
wind-rippled water.</p>

<p class="c004">Thus it was with her: though she did not fall asleep, yet
her mind was wandering about like a bird through the days
of the dead past, through those times that were now no more,
and lived only in memory. She was back again in the
church, with Antek kneeling beside her, and speaking—speaking—and
burning her with those eyes of flame, and
filling her with a sweet torture and dismay!... And then
appeared the flushed and threatening face of the priest, and
his hand stretched out over the people ... and the lighted
tapers.... Then came other reminiscences—old ones: her
meetings with Antek ... their kisses—their embraces ...
till she was full of such a fever of excitement and delectation
that she stretched and pressed herself down on the
pillow with all her might.... And then, once more, she
heard, clear and distinct, the words: “Come out! Come
out!” And it seemed to her that, rising at the call, she
walked, walked on, skulking along through the brushwood
<span class="pageno" id="Page_96">96</span>in the dark, shaken with terror, followed by a hue-and-cry,
and an awful wind blowing after her among the shadows.</p>

<p class="c004">And so this went on unceasingly, one impression after
another ... and a third ... and a fourth ... and so on,
beyond counting: she could in no wise either get rid of
these fancies of hers or control them. A nightmare had her
in its clutches; or ... was it Satan preparing her to sin by
tempting her thus?</p>

<p class="c004">It was broad day when she got out of bed, and she felt as
though she had spent the night on a rack. Every bone in her
ached; she was pale, worn out, unspeakably miserable.</p>

<p class="c004">The frost had slackened a little, but the weather was dull.
Now and again it snowed; and then a great wind would
spring up, worry the trees, and go whistling down the road.
The village, however, was lively and full of the gladness of
Yule-tide, and the roads swarmed with folk. Some were
dashing by in sledges; some talked outside their huts or
went visiting their neighbours; and the children played
about in the lanes, and there was everywhere noise and
merriment in plenty.</p>

<p class="c004">But of merriment there was little in Yagna’s heart. For
all the joyous flickering of the fire on the hearth, she felt
cold: moody in spite of all the mirth and din around her,
and the gay songs of Yuzka, ringing through the cabin.
Though amongst her own people, she was alone—so terribly
alone that she was afraid to look upon them.</p>

<p class="c004">And frequently, whilst letting her fancy listen to Antek’s
passionate whispers, she could not help hearing at the same
time certain other words that went to her soul with no less
force:</p>

<p class="c004">“To all such God’s wrath is reserved, and everlasting
damnation!”—She could distinctly hear the priest’s voice,
and see his glowing face, and his hand stretched out in a
threatening gesture.</p>

<p class="c004">She quailed at the vision, feeling acutely the depth of her
guilt.—“Then I will not go, I will not! It were a mortal
sin, a mortal sin!” she repeated to herself, striving to find
in these words the strength to resist and a shield against evil.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_97">97</span>But then her soul revolted with the pain of it; for indeed
she was attracted to him with all the might and bent of her
vital forces, and turned towards him as a snow-burdened
tree turns towards the sun in spring.</p>

<p class="c004">But the fear of sin had still the upper hand, and she did
her best to forget him—forget him for ever!... She now
stayed at home, fearing to go anywhere about the premises,
lest he might be lurking about and call to her.... For
would she then be able to resist, and not to follow his voice?</p>

<p class="c004">She set about diligently to perform her home duties; but
there was little to be done. Yuzka managed all; besides,
the old man was always after her, unwilling to have her
put her hand to anything.</p>

<p class="c004">“Rest yourself; do not work too much, lest some untimely
harm come upon you!”</p>

<p class="c004">So she did nothing, and only wandered aimlessly about
the cabin, or looked out of the windows—at nothing—or
stood idle in the passage. Meanwhile her longing and her
desire increased continually; and her irritation as well. She
was angered by her husband’s watchful eyes, angered by the
joy and liveliness that filled the place; angered even by
Bociek the stork, walking about the hut, and flapped her
apron to drive it away. At last, when she could bear things
no longer, she chose a convenient opportunity, and ran over
to her mother’s hut. But she went there straight across the
pond, looking round in fear, lest he should be lurking somewhere
behind a tree.</p>

<p class="c004">Her mother was not at home; she had only looked in
early in the day, and then returned to attend the Voyt’s
wife. Andrew sat smoking by the fireside, while Simon
dressed himself in the bedroom.</p>

<p class="c004">Back in her old place, amongst her own furniture and surroundings,
a change came over her and her irritation disappeared.
She was once more in her element, and began
instinctively to move about and do things: going to the
cow-house, straining out the milk which had since the morning
been standing in the pail, throwing corn to the fowls,
sweeping the room, setting things in order, and meantime
<span class="pageno" id="Page_98">98</span>keeping up a brisk conversation with her two brothers; for
Simon, having put on a new capote, had now come in, and
was doing his hair before the looking-glass.</p>

<p class="c004">“So carefully dressed?—Whither away?”</p>

<p class="c004">“To the village, to meet a few lads at the Ploshkas’.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And ... will mother let you go?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I shall not everlastingly ask her leave: my reason is my
own; so is my will.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Surely, surely,” Andrew chimed in timorously, looking
out into the road.</p>

<p class="c004">“You are to know,” the other cried with a bold air, “that
what I do, I will do in spite of her. To the Ploshkas’, aye,
and to the tavern as well, will I go, and drink with the
other lad.”</p>

<p class="c004">“‘A calf wants but its mother’s teat, yet wanders everywhere
for it. So with the fool, whose will’s his rule,’” she
murmured to herself, not caring to contradict him, nor
indeed paying much heed to what he said. She was to return
home now, and had so small a mind to do so, that it
was almost with tears that she took leave of them, and
dragged herself slowly away.</p>

<p class="c004">At her cabin, it was still noisier and merrier than before.
Nastka had run in, and was laughing so gaily with Yuzka
that Yagna could hear them out in the road.</p>

<p class="c004">“Do you know? my rod has blossomed!” she cried to
Yagna as the latter entered.</p>

<p class="c004">“Your rod? what rod?”</p>

<p class="c004">“The one I cut on St. Andrew’s night, planted in sand
upon the stove—and behold, it has blossomed! I looked
at it yesterday, and there was not a single blossom yet.”</p>

<p class="c004">She brought the pot of sand to show her; there stood in
it a rather large spray of a cherry-tree, studded with delicate
blossoms.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, what fragrant pink flowers!” said Vitek wistfully.</p>

<p class="c004">“So they are, so they are!”</p>

<p class="c004">All crowded round, and gazed on the sweet-scented spray
with great joy and wonder. But just then Yagustynka came
<span class="pageno" id="Page_99">99</span>in, now again her former self, loud of speech, bold, and
always seeking an opportunity to sting someone to the quick.</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, Yuzka, the rod has blossomed, but not for you:
what you need yet is the strap, or a good stout cudgel!”
Thus she spoke at once on entering.</p>

<p class="c004">“For me, for me, it has blossomed!” she cried. “I myself
cut it on St. Andrew’s night: I myself!”</p>

<p class="c004">“But,” Yagna explained, “you are as yet too young; no
doubt it has foretold Nastka’s marriage.”</p>

<p class="c004">“We both together put it in the pot; but I cut it, and so
it has blossomed for me!” Yuzka insisted, while the tears
sprang to her eyes, because her right to the prediction was
not admitted.</p>

<p class="c004">“Plenty of time before you, Yuzka, to run after young
men and wait at stiles for them: let your elders go first,” said
Yagna, smiling at Nastka. “So, Yuzka, be quiet.—Here’s
news for you all: that Magda who was at the organist’s gave
birth in the church porch last night!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Can such a thing be?”</p>

<p class="c004">“It can, for it has been. When Ambrose went out to ring,
he stumbled over the girl.”</p>

<p class="c004">“O Lord! and she did not die of cold?”</p>

<p class="c004">“No, not she; but her child did. Yet she all but died
herself. They took her to the priest’s dwelling, and they
are tending her still. But ... ’twere better they had let her
alone. What has she to live for? Can aught of good come
to her now?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Matthew told me that when the organist turned her away,
she was always at the miller’s, and staying there overnight,
till at last—probably by the miller’s directions—her Franek
beat her and sent her flying.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Well,” said Yagustynka, “what was he to do with her?
Frame her like a picture and hang her up, hey?—Franek is
like his fellows: ‘He of oaths made a lot; what he wanted
he got—and then kept them not.’ Not faultless he, not by
any means: but the organist is by far the worst of all.
While she was well, they made her work as much as a yoke
<span class="pageno" id="Page_100">100</span>of oxen ploughing: she alone did everything for them. And
now, as soon as she is ill, they have driven her away! A
murrain on such folk!”</p>

<p class="c004">“But,” Nastka cried, “wherefore did she yield to Franek?”</p>

<p class="c004">“And you also would yield to Yasyek, were you but sure
that the banns would follow!”</p>

<p class="c004">Nastka took offense at this, and a quarrel seemed imminent,
but Boryna came in at that moment, and they said no
more.</p>

<p class="c004">“Do ye know about Magda? She is still living, but in a
dead faint. Had she been left there the space of another
‘Pater,’ Ambrose says, she would have turned up her toes.
Roch is rubbing her with snow, and giving her to drink; but
they think she will not be well for a long time.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And whither is she to go then, poor thing?”</p>

<p class="c004">“No doubt the Koziols will take her to their home: she
is a kinswoman of theirs.”</p>

<p class="c004">“The Koziols, indeed! Why, they have naught themselves
but what they can filch or get by cheating: how could
they nurse her? And here we have so many wealthy men
and landowners, and none will come forward to help her!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, yes,” Boryna said; “farmers have endless treasures,
and everything falls to them from the sky, and their only
business is to help everyone! What, shall I gather all the
needy on all the highways, bring them in here, and feed and
nurse them, and pay the doctor for them, perhaps, into the
bargain?—Ye are old, Yagustynka, and the wind blows in
your head.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I say not that anyone can be forced to aid the needy;
but yet men are not beasts, nor should they be left to
perish out of doors.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Well, things in this world are as they are, and must remain
so, and ye will not change them.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Long ago, before the war—in the days when the nobles
were masters, there was, I remember, a hospital in the village
for poor people. Yes, and it was in the very house where
the organist dwells now. And I remember, too, folk had to
pay to keep it up—so much out of every acre they had.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_101">101</span>Boryna was annoyed and surly: he did not care to discuss
the matter, and closed the debate with:</p>

<p class="c004">“Talking of this will do as much good as incense burnt
to bring the dead to life.”</p>

<p class="c004">“True, no good at all. On him that feels no pity for the
cries of those who suffer, their tears too will have no effect.
The thriving man thinks that all in this world goes well and
as God has commanded.”</p>

<p class="c004">To this Boryna gave no reply, so Yagustynka turned to
Nastka.</p>

<p class="c004">“And what about Matthew’s ribs? Any better?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Matthew? why, what has befallen him?”</p>

<p class="c004">“What!” Nastka exclaimed; “do ye not know of it? It
came to pass ere Yule-tide.... Your Antek flew at him,
took him by the throat, carried him out of the mill, and
dashed him against the fence so hard that the railing broke.
He fell in and was like to drown. Now he is ill, and spits
blood, and cannot move. Ambrose says he has four ribs
broken, and his womb is out of place.<a id="r8"/><a class="c002 pginternal" href="#f8"><sup>[8]</sup></a> And now he is always
moaning and groaning.”</p>

<p class="c004">She burst into tears.</p>

<p class="c004">At the first words, Yagna had started up, struck with the
feeling that the fight had been about herself. But presently
she sat down again upon a chest, pressing her lips to the
cherry-blossoms to cool them.</p>

<p class="c004">Those of the house were astounded: though the incident
was the talk of the whole village, no whisper of it had yet
come to Boryna’s cabin.</p>

<p class="c004">He growled: “Like has fallen foul of like—one ruffian
of another. No great harm done!”</p>

<p class="c004">“But,” Yagna inquired after a pause, “why did they
fight?”</p>

<p class="c004">“On account of you!” the old woman said, with a spiteful
snarl.</p>

<p class="c004">“Pray speak the truth!”</p>

<p class="c004">“It is as I say. Matthew was at the mill, boasting in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_102">102</span>the presence of some men that he had been with you in your
bedroom.... And Antek heard, and gave him a beating.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Spare me your jests; I have no mind to hear them!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Will you not believe me? Then ask the whole village;
they will tell you the same. Did I say that Matthew was
speaking true? Nay, I only repeated the village talk.”</p>

<p class="c004">“He is a liar ... a foul liar and a villain!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Who can protect you from evil tongues? They will
often slander you beyond the grave.”</p>

<p class="c004">“’Tis well ... ’tis well he beat him!... I fain would
add to the beating!” she hissed vindictively.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oho! The chicken’s claws turn a hawk’s talons!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye! for the lie he told, I would kill him on the spot, the
false hound!”</p>

<p class="c004">“To everyone I say he lies, but they believe me not, and
backbite you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, but Antek will silence them—cut their tongues out!”</p>

<p class="c004">Yagustynka leered at her maliciously. “Is he to fight the
whole world for you, eh?”</p>

<p class="c004">“O you Judas woman, you! With your sly hints and
whispers, and the joy you take in giving pain!”</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna was now in a towering passion; perhaps she had
never yet been so angry in her life. What she felt would
have been beyond bearing, but for Antek’s conduct that she
now heard of. She was flooded with tenderness, and unspeakable
gratitude filled her heart that he had so well taken
her part and avenged her. Nevertheless, she exhibited so
much ill temper at everything that went on in the house,
and rated Yuzka and Vitek so sternly for every trifle, that
old Boryna felt uneasy, and came to sit by her side, stroking
her face and asking:</p>

<p class="c004">“What is it ails my Yagna?”</p>

<p class="c004">“What should ail me? Naught.—Let me be: would ye
make love before everybody?” And she pushed him roughly
away.</p>

<p class="c004">“He would soothe and blandish and cuddle her, would he?
That withered fellow, that spent worn-out old man!” she
thought, and a feeling of strong dislike welled up within
<span class="pageno" id="Page_103">103</span>her. Not till now had she noticed his age: now, for the
first time, there came to her a sense of loathing, a deep-seated
repugnance, almost hatred. She now looked upon
him with glad concealed contempt; for he had really aged a
good deal in these last days: his hands were shaking, and
he dragged his feet and stooped.</p>

<p class="c004">“That nerveless old driveller!”</p>

<p class="c004">She shook herself with disgust, and set to thinking all
the more intensely of Antek. No longer did she strive
against the memories that pressed upon her, nor seek not to
hear those sweet tempting whispers of his.</p>

<p class="c004">The day dragged on, intolerably slow. Every minute she
would go out into the porch, or as far as the orchard behind
the hut, and look through the trees at the fields beyond ...
or lean against the wattled fence which stood between her
and the village road that ran past the farm buildings. With
wistful looks, she would scan the country-side—the snow-covered
lands—the dark forest at the sky-line.... But
she took note of nothing, so deep was she plunged in the
joyous knowledge that <i>he</i> cared for her, and would let no
one do her wrong.</p>

<p class="c004">“And he would serve anyone the same! What a man he
is, what a fighter!” she thought with tender admiration.
“Oh, if he came in sight now, I could not resist him for one
instant!”</p>

<p class="c004">The haystack stood close by, near the road, but at some
distance within the field. Flocks of sparrows chirruped
round it, and took shelter in a great hole that had been
scooped out of one side. The farm-lad, though ordered by
Boryna to go up and take the hay always from the top, had
not cared to do so, but pulled truss after truss out of the side,
till enough had gone to form a sort of small den, in which
two persons might easily find room.</p>

<p class="c004">“Come out—come out behind the haystack!” Her mind
was continually repeating Antek’s petition. But now she
ran back to the hut; the bells were beginning to ring for
Vespers, and she herself had a longing to go to church, in
the vague hope of meeting him there.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_104">104</span>Him she did not meet: but instead, in the very entrance,
she saw Hanka, greeted her, and held back for her to put her
hand first into the holy water stoup. But Hanka neither
made answer nor stretched out her hand to the stoup, but
passed on, darting out of her eyes a look at her—a deadly
look! as though she would have stoned her willingly.</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna’s eyes grew dim. Such a slight! so open an exhibition
of hate! Yet, from the pew in which she seated herself,
she could not help fixing her eyes on that pallid face.</p>

<p class="c004">“Antek’s wife—and so haggard, so ghastly to see! Well,
well!” But her thoughts soon wandered away from Hanka.
They were singing in the choir, and the organ played sweet
music, so low and soft and mysterious that it absorbed all
her attention. Never, no, never had she felt so happy in
church, so serenely blissful! She did not even say prayers;
her book lay before her unopened; her beads were in her
hand, but she did not tell them. She sighed dreamily, and
looked up to see the shadows creeping slowly in through the
windows, and to gaze on the pictures, the scintillating lights,
the gilded woodwork, and the now scarce visible many-coloured
decorations. Amongst all these marvels, her soul
soared up, lost itself in the painted skies, in the chanted
prayers and the faint dying melodies that she heard. Dissolved
in a serene ecstasy, oblivious of everything round
her, she fancied she saw the saints come down out of their
pictures, approach her with smiles of infinite kindness, and
stretch forth their hands in blessings over her and over all
the people.</p>

<p class="c004">She ceased to dream only when Evensong was at an end
and the organ hushed. The silence roused her from her
trance; unwillingly she rose and went out with the others.
And now again, at the church-door, she met with Hanka,
who stood and faced her as though intending to speak—but
only darted a look of hatred at her and went out.</p>

<p class="c004">“What, does the silly woman think to daunt me by glaring?”
was Yagna’s mental comment as she walked home.</p>

<p class="c004">Evening had fallen now—quiet, dull, holy. It was murky
outside; the stars’ faint light shone dim in the hazy sky;
<span class="pageno" id="Page_105">105</span>a little snow came down, flake by flake, looking like long
fluffy threads, and noiselessly fluttering past the window-panes.</p>

<p class="c004">In the cabin, too, it was quiet and somewhat dull. Simon
had come as soon as evening had closed in—ostensibly to
visit them, but really to meet with Nastka; and the two sat
side by side, talking in low voices. Boryna was not home
yet. Yagustynka sat on one side of the fire-place, peeling
potatoes. On the other, Pete was playing a tune on his violin,
very gently, but with such sad notes that now and then
Lapa would whine, or vent a long-drawn howl. Vitek was
there too, along with Yuzka. After a time, Yagna, whom
the tune made nervous, called out from the bedroom:</p>

<p class="c004">“Pete, pray leave off: that music of yours is too dismal!”</p>

<p class="c004">And the violin sounded no more. But presently it was
heard anew; for subdued strains, all but inaudible, now came
from the stable, whither Pete had withdrawn; and there he
continued playing far into the night. When Boryna came
in, supper was getting ready.</p>

<p class="c004">“Well, the Voyt’s wife is brought to bed. Folk are
swarming there so that Dominikova has to drive them off,
they come in such crowds. Yagna, you must go and see her
to-morrow.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Instantly—I will go instantly!” she cried, excited and
eager all at once.</p>

<p class="c004">“Very well; and I’ll go with you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah! Perhaps to-morrow will do better.” And she
added, to explain her quick change of mind: “Yes, I should
prefer going in the day-time. The snow is falling, it is dark,
and you say there are so many people.”</p>

<p class="c004">He acquiesced; all the more readily because the smith’s
wife and children entered the hut just then.</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, where is your goodman?”</p>

<p class="c004">“At Vola. The threshing-machine there is out of order,
and the manor blacksmith cannot put it to rights.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Somehow,” Yagustynka observed, in tones full of significance,
“somehow he goes very often to the manor now.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Have ye any objection?”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_106">106</span>“None in the world. I only note one thing and another,
and watch to see what will come of it all.”</p>

<p class="c004">Her words failed to set tongues wagging; no one cared to
talk loud. Each spoke to his neighbour in drowsy whispers;
all were heavy with sleep, of which they had had too little
the night before. They supped, too, with but little relish,
and looked (not without surprise) at Yagna, who was in high
spirits, bustling about the room, pressing them to eat, even
after they had laid down their spoons, bursting into laughter,
no one knew why, and sitting down beside the girls and talking
nonsense, to break off on a sudden and run out to the
other lodgings ... and return when she had got only as
far as the passage. Truth is, she was racked with a fever of
anguish and dread. The evening wore away sluggishly,
wearily, whilst her longing to go out behind the hut—to
the haystack—grew ever stronger and stronger. Yet she
could not make up her mind to go. She feared to be seen—she
feared to commit sin. She was putting forth all her
power of self-control, and trembling with the agony of effort;
her soul cried out for liberty like a chained-up dog;
her heart was rent within her. No, no! she could not bear
it!... Perhaps he was standing there ... looking about
for her ... he might be prowling round the cabin.... Perhaps,
hidden in the orchard, he was even then looking in at
the window at her ... and imploring ... and pining
away with sad desire!... Then she thought she would
run out, but only for a minute ... only to say one word,
to tell him he must not come to her nor she to him, for it
was a sin.... And now she was looking for her apron to
put it on ... and now she made for the door.... But
there something caught hold of her by the nape of the neck,
as it were, and pulled her back.—Yagustynka’s eyes followed
each of her movements, like a sleuth-hound.—Nastka too
looked strangely at her.—And the old man too!—Did they
know? had they found out anything?... “No, no; I will
not go out to-day.”</p>

<p class="c004">Lapa, barking outside the hut, roused her at last from
the state of obsession she was in. The cabin was nearly
<span class="pageno" id="Page_107">107</span>empty. Only Yagustynka sat there, dozing by the fireside.
Her goodman, too, was standing at the window and looking
out; for the dog barked more and more furiously.</p>

<p class="c004">“No doubt, Antek, no longer able to wait, had now....”
She broke off in terror.</p>

<p class="c004">But only old Klemba stood there in the doorway. Behind
him, shaking and stamping the snow off their clothes
and boots, came Vinciorek, Gregory “the Lame,” Michael
Caban, Franek Bylitsa (Hanka’s uncle), Valenty “the Wry-mouthed,”
and Joseph Vahnik!</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna marvelled much at this deputation, as it seemed
to be, but said not a word, except to answer their greetings.
He shook hands all round, bade them be seated on the
benches he pushed forwards, and offered his snuff-box.</p>

<p class="c004">They all sat down in a row, and took a pinch, nothing
loath; one sneezed, another blew his nose, a third wiped his
eyes, the snuff being of first-class strength.... They then
looked round them, and some spoke a few words—about the
snowy weather, about hard times—while others assented with
grunts and nods: all, however, approaching at leisure the
object of their visit.</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna shifted uneasily on his bench, stared at them, and
attempted by various means to draw them out and learn
what they would have of him.</p>

<p class="c004">He failed. They sat there in a row, hoary-headed clean-shaven
old men, nearly of an age, hale as yet, though bowed
down by years and labour; ponderous as moss-grown
boulders in the fields, rugged, tough-sinewed, ungainly, but
hard-headed and shrewd, they fought shy of speaking before
the time, and approached the matter in hand circuitously,
as sagacious sheep-dogs do a flock they aim at driving
through a gate.</p>

<p class="c004">At length, however, Klemba cleared his throat, expectorated,
and said with a dignified mien:</p>

<p class="c004">“How long shall we hang back and beat about the bush?
We come to know if ye are on our side or not.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Without you we cannot decide aught.”</p>

<p class="c004">“For ye are the first man amongst us all.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_108">108</span>“And wisdom has been given you by our Lord.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And though ye have no office, yet are ye the leader of
us all.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Also our common interests are at stake.”</p>

<p class="c004">Each man had his say, and every one was so complimentary
to Boryna that he turned red, held up his hands in
deprecation, and exclaimed:</p>

<p class="c004">“Kind friends, I do not even know as yet what brings you
hither!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Our forest! After Twelfth Night, they intend to cut it
down.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I know they even now saw timber at the mill.”</p>

<p class="c004">“But that belongs to Jews in Rudka, as we thought ye
knew.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I did not: I have little time to go about and question
folk.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yet ye were first to make complaint against the Squire?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Because I thought that he had sold the timber of our
clearing.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, whose else? say whose!” Caban interrupted.</p>

<p class="c004">“That on the land he bought himself; his own.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, but he also has sold the timber of Vilche Doly, and
they are now to cut it down!”</p>

<p class="c004">“That he can only do if we agree!”</p>

<p class="c004">“And yet the trees are marked already; they have measured
out the land, and will begin to fell the timber after
Twelfth Night.”</p>

<p class="c004">“If ’tis thus”—Boryna paused to reflect—“if so, then we
shall enter a complaint before the commissary.”</p>

<p class="c004">“‘From seed-time to harvest, complainant, thou starvest!’”
Caban muttered; and Valenty “the Wry-mouthed”
chimed in:</p>

<p class="c004">“‘In dying condition, folk need no physician.’”</p>

<p class="c004">“A complaint will do this much: ere the official prohibition
is issued, there will not remain a single stump of the
wood—<i>our</i> wood.—Remember what they did at Debitsa!”</p>

<p class="c004">“‘The wolf that tastes a single lamb, with the whole flock
its maw will cram.’ The manor folk are like the wolf.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_109">109</span>“This,” Boryna said, “must be prevented.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Matthias, these are words of wisdom. To-morrow, when
mass is over, the farmers are to meet at my cabin and see
what we should do; and they have sent to ask you to come
over with good advice.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Shall they all be there?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, and just after mass.”</p>

<p class="c004">“To-morrow?—What can I do?—You see, I must be to-morrow
at Vola without fail. Kinsmen of mine are dividing
land there, quarrelling and bringing actions one against
another. I have promised to arbitrate there, so that the
orphans shall suffer no wrong. So I must go; but I agree
to stand by the meeting’s decision.”</p>

<p class="c004">They left the hut somewhat dissatisfied. He had approved
them and agreed with all they said; but they had the impression
he was not sincerely holding with them.</p>

<p class="c004">“You will decide as you choose,” he was thinking; “I
shall be clear of it. Neither the Voyt, nor the miller, nor
any of the foremost men here follow you.... The Squire,
if he knows I am not hostile to him, will compensate me
more willingly for the cow; and he may come to an understanding
with each of us separately.—They are foolish: it
were better to let him cut the very last sapling down—and
then go to law—lodge a complaint—get an injunction—and
so wring out of him far more than he would have given by
any agreement.”</p>

<p class="c004">Long after everyone else was in bed, Matthias still sat
up, poring over a board on which he had made calculations
with chalk, and revolving many things in his mind.</p>

<p class="c004">The next day, immediately after breakfast, he ordered the
sledge to be got ready.</p>

<p class="c004">“As I said last night, I am off to Vola. Yagna, take good
care of the house; if anyone should ask after me, say I was
obliged to go.—And do not forget to look in at the Voyt’s.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Will ye come home late?” she asked, concealing the joy
she felt.</p>

<p class="c004">“About supper-time: perhaps later.”</p>

<p class="c004">He put on his best suit, which she brought him from the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_110">110</span>store-room. Instead of a button, she passed a ribbon
through his shirt button-holes and tied it; she helped him
to dress, and hurried Pete on, with feverish impatience to
get the horses harnessed in a trice. She was all the time
in rapid movement, and her heart cried out for gladness:
her goodman would be absent for the whole day, and was
to return late ... perhaps only near midnight! While
she would remain alone!—And at dusk—at dusk—she could
go out—out behind the haystack! Aha!... She exulted
in her soul; her eyes beamed with laughter, she stretched
and drew herself up; shocks as of tingling and burning electric
fluid went through her with most exquisitely sweet
torment.... And then, all at once and unexpectedly, a
strange feeling of dread took hold of her, and a dead hush
came over her soul, and she looked on, as one dazed, at
Boryna, as he put on his cap and gave his orders to Vitek.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, pray, pray, take me with you!” she whispered low.</p>

<p class="c004">“But—but,” Boryna stammered in astonishment, “who
will take your place at home?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yet take me.—It is St. Stephen’s feast to-day, and there
is little to do. Take me; I feel so dejected here!” And she
begged so hard that—much as he wondered at her whim—he
made no further difficulties. A few minutes later, she was
ready, and off they set from the hut, the sledge swaying and
sweeping round with all the might of straining hocks and
beating hoofs.</p>
<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_111">111</span>
  <!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER VI</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">“I thought,” he muttered sourly, “you’d been lost
in some snow-drift!”</p>

<p class="c004">“In such a storm as this, how could I go faster? I
had to grope my way along, for the snow blew in my eyes
so, I could not keep them open; and it drives along the roads
so thick that it hides everything two paces away.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Your mother at home?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Surely; where else, in such villainous weather? She was
at the Koziols, this morning. Magda is in a bad way,
though, and like to go to the churchyard, ‘the priest’s cow-byre.’”
So answered Yagna, shaking the snow from her
clothes.</p>

<p class="c004">“Any gossip abroad?” he inquired, chaffing her.</p>

<p class="c004">“Go out and ask, and ye will know. I did not run thither
to gossip.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Do you know that the Squire is here?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Here? In such a storm it were hard to keep a dog out
of doors; and he has freely chosen to come?”</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Who must, will go, even through storms of snow.’”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, who must.” She smiled sceptically.</p>

<p class="c004">“He himself promised; no one asked him,” Boryna answered
sternly. Then he set aside a barrel hoop he was
working at, and got up to look out at the window; but such
a hurricane of snow filled the air, whirling and swirling outside,
that neither trees nor fences were visible.</p>

<p class="c004">“I think the snow is not coming down any more,” he
added, more gently.</p>

<p class="c004">“No, it is only blown and swept about so, that one cannot
see one’s way,” Yagna replied, warming her hands, and setting
to wind the thread from a spindle on to a reel. Her
husband, after again peeping out of the window, and listening
with still greater impatience, took up his work.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_112">112</span>“Yuzka—where is she?” he asked presently.</p>

<p class="c004">“Gone to Nastka’s, no doubt; she is always there.”</p>

<p class="c004">“The girl’s a gadabout—never at home for the space of a
‘pater.’”</p>

<p class="c004">“She says staying at home is wearisome.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Wants to divert herself, the little chit!”</p>

<p class="c004">“No; to shirk her duties, rather.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Can ye not forbid her?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I? Once I did; and was abused and railed at for my
pains. Ye must give her orders yourself: mine are of no
account.”</p>

<p class="c004">To this complaint Boryna paid little attention; he was
listening with extreme impatience. But no human voice
was audible outside, only the gale blowing, roaring here and
there, and smiting the walls till they vibrated and groaned
again.</p>

<p class="c004">“Going out?” she asked.</p>

<p class="c004">He made no answer, hearing the front door open; and
immediately Vitek ran in, out of breath, and crying out,
as he entered:</p>

<p class="c004">“The Squire has come!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Only now? Shut the door, quick!”</p>

<p class="c004">“I can hear the jingling of his harness-bells still.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Did he come alone?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I could only distinguish the horses, the air was so thick.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Run this instant and find out where he has stopped.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Shall ye go to him?” she asked, with bated breath.</p>

<p class="c004">“Not until he has asked to see me; I shall not invite myself.
But without me he can do nothing.”</p>

<p class="c004">There was a pause: Yagna winding up threads, counting
them and making them into skeins, while her goodman, so
impatient that he could not work any longer, laid the things
down and was preparing to go out ... when in bolted
Vitek!</p>

<p class="c004">“The Squire is at the miller’s, in his front room—and his
horses stand in the yard.”</p>

<p class="c004">“How have you dirtied yourself so?”</p>

<p class="c004">“The wind blew me into a snow-drift.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_113">113</span>“Say rather you were fighting with other young rascals
in the snow!”</p>

<p class="c004">“No, it was the wind!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, aye: tear your clothes, do: you’ll get such a beating
from me as you’ll remember!”</p>

<p class="c004">“But it’s true what I say. It blows and blusters so, one
can scarcely keep one’s feet.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Get away from the fire-place; you will warm yourself
enough later.—Go to Pete, tell him to do some threshing;
and you are to help him—not run about the village like a
dog with its tongue lolling out.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I go,” he answered sulkily; “but I must first bring firewood,
as mistress ordered me.” He sorely wished to tell
what he had seen in the village. Going out, he whistled to
Lapa, but the dog, curled up by the fireside, paid no heed
to him. Boryna, dressed to go, went about the cabin, poked
the logs, peeped into the stable, looked out of the window,
and waited with growing restlessness to be sent for; but no
one came.</p>

<p class="c004">“He may have forgotten,” Yagna hazarded.</p>

<p class="c004">“Forgotten?—Forgotten <i>me</i>?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Perhaps. Ye trust the blacksmith so, and he is such a
liar.”</p>

<p class="c004">“You are a fool. Speak not of what ye do not understand.”</p>

<p class="c004">Offended, she became mute. He tried in vain to bring
her round with kind words, and at last he too lost his temper,
snatched up his cap and strode out, slamming the door.</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna, having supplied her distaff with flax, sat down by
the window, and began to spin, with a glance from time to
time at the tempest of snow that raged outside.</p>

<p class="c004">The wind howled deafeningly. Great clouds of powdery
snow, as large as houses, torn and tattered and formless,
were whisked about in every direction, and again and again
broke upon the cabin walls, making every beam and rafter
tremble, rattling the contents of the sideboard, and swinging
to and fro Yuzka’s “globes” and “stars” that dangled
overhead.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_114">114</span>A draught, piercingly cold, came in through the doors and
windows, making Yagna throw her apron over her shoulders,
and Lapa more than once shift his place for a warmer nook.</p>

<p class="c004">Vitek entered noiselessly, and said, not without hesitation:</p>

<p class="c004">“Mistress!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Well?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Do you know, the Squire has driven over with stallions!
Carriage-horses they are, black as night, with red netting
and plumes on their heads, and tinkling bells about their
flanks; and they shine like the gildings in the church. And
how they did fly past! Oh, faster far than the wind!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Of course.—They are not peasants’ horses: they belong
to the manor.”</p>

<p class="c004">“O Lord! I never saw such wonderful beasts!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Could they be otherwise, with no field-work to do, and
feeding on naught but oats?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ye are right, mistress.—But should we feed our filly
so, and dock her tail, and harness her together with the
Voyt’s mare, would they go as well as these?”</p>

<p class="c004">The dog started up in alarm, and barked.</p>

<p class="c004">“Someone is in the passage: see who it is.”</p>

<p class="c004">But ere Vitek could do so, a man, crusted over with snow,
appeared on the threshold, “praised God,” beat his cap on
the leg of his boot, and looked round the room.</p>

<p class="c004">“Pray let me breathe a space and warm myself here,” he
gasped.</p>

<p class="c004">“Be seated,” she replied, in some confusion. “Vitek, put
more logs on the fire.”</p>

<p class="c004">The stranger sat down on the hearth, warmed himself,
and lit a pipe.</p>

<p class="c004">“Is this the dwelling of Boryna—Matthias Boryna?” he
asked, consulting a paper.</p>

<p class="c004">“It is,” she answered, fearing she might have to do with
someone of the police.</p>

<p class="c004">“Is your father at home?”</p>

<p class="c004">“My <i>husband</i> is gone to the village.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Allow me to wait here a little, warming myself by the
fire: I am quite frozen.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_115">115</span>“You are welcome: neither bench nor fire will lose
thereby.”</p>

<p class="c004">He took off his sheepskin coat, but had evidently been
chilled to the marrow, for he shivered all over, rubbed his
hands, and drew nearer and nearer still to the fire.</p>

<p class="c004">“This year,” he remarked, “we have a bitterly hard
winter.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Of a truth, it is not mild.—May I heat a little milk for
you?”</p>

<p class="c004">“No, thanks; but I should like some tea.”</p>

<p class="c004">“We had some not long since, in autumn, when my goodman
had pains inside, and I got some from town for him;
but it is all run out, and I cannot say where I could obtain
any here.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why,” Vitek put in, “his Reverence is drinking tea all
day long.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Would you run to him and borrow some?”</p>

<p class="c004">“No need. I have some by me—if you would give me
some water....”</p>

<p class="c004">“I shall boil some at once.”</p>

<p class="c004">She placed a pot on the fire, and returned to her spinning,
but spun no more; while she seemed to be twirling the spindle,
she was scanning him with great curiosity.—Who could
he be? what did he want? Was he a man of the police,
making out some list? the paper he was always consulting
seemed to point to that.—His apparel, too, was not of her
class: grey and green, like the hunting-dress of a manor-house
footman.... But again, he was wearing a peasant’s
sheepskin and cap!—He might possibly be an eccentric fellow,
or perhaps a world-ranger.</p>

<p class="c004">Thus she pondered, exchanging glances with Vitek, who,
apparently gazing into the fire, scrutinized the stranger, and
was much surprised to hear him try and make friends with
Lapa.</p>

<p class="c004">“Pray beware: that dog bites!” he could not help exclaiming.</p>

<p class="c004">“Fear naught!” he said, and, with a singular smile, he
patted the dog’s head, come to rest on his knees.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_116">116</span>Presently Yuzka came in and, soon after, Vavrek’s wife,
and several other neighbours; for already the news had been
spread abroad that a stranger had come to Boryna’s hut.</p>

<p class="c004">But he continued warming himself, paying no attention
to the people or their whispers and remarks. When the
water in the pot boiled, he took some tea out of a piece of
paper, poured the tea in, took a white mug down from the
shelf, and drank the tea thus made, nibbling at a lump of
sugar the while, and walking about the room, examining the
pieces of furniture, or standing in the midst and eyeing the
people with such sharp glances that they felt confused.</p>

<p class="c004">“Who made these?” he asked, pointing to the wafer
“globes” that dangled from the ceiling.</p>

<p class="c004">“I did!” Yuzka sang out, turning very red.</p>

<p class="c004">He resumed his walk, Lapa following him step by step.</p>

<p class="c004">“And who did these paintings?” he inquired, stopping
before a few of the cut-out figures that were on the picture-frames
and the walls.</p>

<p class="c004">“They are not painted, but cut out of paper.”</p>

<p class="c004">“You don’t say so!” he exclaimed.</p>

<p class="c004">“I do, for I cut them out myself.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And did you invent them?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Of course, but every child here can do as much.”</p>

<p class="c004">He said nothing further, poured out some more tea, sat
down by the fire again, and a pretty long silence ensued.
The folk slunk away; night was coming on, and the storm
had abated. At times an angry gust would still rush by,
but at rarer intervals and with less fury, like a bird that a
long flight has worn out.</p>

<p class="c004">At length, Yagna put her distaff aside, and began to prepare
supper.</p>

<p class="c004">“Was one James Soha ever in your service?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Is it Kuba you mean?—Aye, he was, but he died last
autumn, poor man!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Your parish priest has told me so.—Lord God! I have
been seeking him for ever so long in all the villages around,
and find him dead!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Have you sought for our Kuba?” cried Vitek, greatly
<span class="pageno" id="Page_117">117</span>touched. “Then ye are surely brother to the Squire of
Vola.”</p>

<p class="c004">“How do you know that?”</p>

<p class="c004">“People have often told me his brother was back from a
far-off land, and seeking a certain Kuba in all the country-side:
but no one could tell who that Kuba was.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Soha was his other name; I learned only to-day that he
was dead, and had been in your service.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes,” Vitek sobbed; “he was shot, and died—died of
loss of blood!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Was he long with you?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ever since I can remember.”</p>

<p class="c004">“An honest fellow, I suppose?” he asked hesitatingly.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, the whole village will tell you how honest he was:
all wept at his funeral, all, even his Reverence, who would
take no money for the burying.—He taught me my prayers,
and how to use a gun, and was like a father to me....
Sometimes, too, he would give me a five-kopek bit.—Religious
he was, and a quiet man, a hard worker, and one that
his Reverence has praised many a time.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Is he buried in your churchyard?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Where else should he be?” Vitek returned. “I know
the place; Ambrose set up a cross there, and Roch wrote
about him on it. Even were it covered with snow, I could
find it for you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Then let’s start at once, to get there ere nightfall.”</p>

<p class="c004">The stranger put his sheepskin on, and stood there in a
brown study for a time. A man of many years, somewhat
stooping, grey-haired and withered. His rugged face had
a clayey tint, with a deep scar in one cheek from a bullet,
and another, long and fiery, on his brow. His nose was
long, his beard tufted and scanty, his eyes dark, deep-sunk
and glowing; a pipe was always in his mouth, and he was
always refilling it.—Waking up at last from his reverie, he
bethought himself of offering money to Yagna, who put her
hands behind her back, and flushed crimson.</p>

<p class="c004">“Pray take it: nothing in the world is given for nothing.”</p>

<p class="c004">“In the world, that may be the fashion,” she retorted,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_118">118</span>with wounded pride. “Am I a Jewess or a trader, to take
money for a little fire and water?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Well, God reward your hospitality! Tell your husband
that Yacek from Vola has been here: he will remember me.
I shall be here again some day, but am now in haste, for
night is near. God be with you!”</p>

<p class="c004">“And with you also!”</p>

<p class="c004">She would have kissed his hand, but he snatched it away,
and hurried out of the cabin.</p>

<p class="c004">The darkness was coming down slowly over the land.
The great gale had gone down, but from the hillocks of
drifted snow that lay across the road, there blew a dry
powdery dust, like flour shaken out of a cloth. Above, all
was now tranquil: huts and gardens came clear and distinct
out of the livid blur of the uprising dusk.</p>

<p class="c004">The village, lethargic during the blizzard, had started up;
the ways were full of passers-by, the gardens of voices;
here and there they were clearing away snow from before
the huts, or cutting holes in the ice and carrying water
from the pond; gates were opening and a few sledges ploughing
their way through the snow. Crows—an infallible
sign that the weather was about to change—appeared, hopping
about the huts.</p>

<p class="c004">Mr. Yacek gazed round him with interest, asking at times
about the people they met or the huts they passed by, and
walked so fast that Vitek could scarcely keep pace with him.
Lapa ran on in front, barking gaily.</p>

<p class="c004">In front of the church, the snow was piled up in such
great masses that it went over the fence completely, and
was as high as the boughs of the trees. They were accordingly
compelled to go round the priest’s dwelling-house,
outside of which a troop of urchins were running to and
fro, shouting and snow-balling each other. Lapa barked
at them; one boy caught it by the neck and threw it into
a feathery steamy drift. Vitek rushed to the rescue, but
they pelted him so hard, he could scarcely get away; and,
having retaliated as best he could, he ran to rejoin Mr.
Yacek, who had not waited for him.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_119">119</span>With difficulty they plodded through as far as the
burying-ground. Here, too, the snow was often as high as
a man, and the black arms of the crosses were only just
above the surface of the white mounds that covered the
graves. The place was somewhat exposed and there was
some wind here. Now and then, wafting the powdery snow
hither and thither, it hid all things from sight, except the
naked trees waving their shattered branches and looming
with dark trunks through the cloudy veil. All the fields
around were one plain of pure white; and just beyond the
churchyard, hard upon a score of people could be seen going
along the deeply covered road, bending forward under very
heavy burdens that they bore. When the wreaths that hid
them now and then were swept away, and the wind fell,
women’s red petticoats were seen clear and distinct, straggling
units on the plain.</p>

<p class="c004">“Who are these? Are they returning from some fair?”</p>

<p class="c004">“No, they are <i>komorniki</i>,<a id="r9"/><a class="c002 pginternal" href="#f9"><sup>[9]</sup></a> and have been to the forest to
get firewood.”</p>

<p class="c004">“What, are they carrying it on their backs?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Surely. As they have no horses, their shoulders must
bear the load.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Many such in the village?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Not a few. Only the <i>gospodarze</i> have land; the others
live in lodgings, and go out to work, or take service on
farms.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Do they often go out to fetch firing?”</p>

<p class="c004">“The manor allows them to come twice a week with billhooks
and take as much dry wood as they can break off and
carry in their bundles. The <i>gospodarze</i> alone have the
right to go to the forest with a cart, and use an ax on the
trees.... We have often and often, Kuba and I, gone there
together, and come back with a splendid tree in the cart!
<span class="pageno" id="Page_120">120</span>Kuba knew well how to fell a hornbeam, and conceal it
so amongst the firewood faggots that even the keeper never
caught him,” he said, not without pride.</p>

<p class="c004">“Was he long in pain? Tell me all.”</p>

<p class="c004">This Vitek did, nothing loath, Mr. Yacek putting some
questions to him from time to time, now stopping short,
gesticulating and exclaiming aloud. The lad thought his
manner strange, could not make out what he meant, and
was beginning to feel terror besides: it was getting so dark;
the whole churchyard looked as though clad in a huge
shroud, and murmuring with eerie voices. So he ran on
in front and, with eyes starting from their sockets, looked
about for the cross that marked Kuba’s grave. At last he
found it, close to the fence, and near the scattered tombs of
those slain in the insurrection—“the War”—where he had
prayed on All Souls’ Day.</p>

<p class="c004">“Here it is, and the name, written on the cross: James
Soha.”—He spelt it out, following every one of the great
white letters with his finger. “Yes, Roch wrote that, and
Ambrose made the cross.”</p>

<p class="c004">Mr. Yacek gave him a couple of <i>zloty</i>, and bade him run
home. So he did, and scampered away, but stopped once
to whistle for Lapa, and glance back to see what the stranger
was about.</p>

<p class="c004">“Lord! The brother to the Squire, kneeling at Kuba’s
grave!” he ejaculated, stupefied. But night was coming on
fast, and the trees, bending down over him, shook their
heads in a weird way; so he went back to the village at a
run, and by a short cut; only stopping near the church to
take breath and look at the money he had safe in his closed
fist. The dog caught up with him, and they went back at
leisure to the cabin.</p>

<p class="c004">Close to the pond he met Antek, returning from his work.
The dog rushed to fawn on him, whined with delight and
barked, and Antek caressed it kindly.</p>

<p class="c004">“Good dog! good dog!—Whence come you, Vitek?”</p>

<p class="c004">He told him of all, omitting the money given.</p>

<p class="c004">“Come one of these days and see my children.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_121">121</span>“Yes, yes; I have made a cart for little Peter, and another
funny figure besides.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Do not forget to bring them.—And here is something for
yourself.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I’ll come this very day, but first I must see if master
is home yet.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Is he out?” Antek inquired, with poorly assumed indifference.</p>

<p class="c004">“At the miller’s, taking counsel with the Squire and a
few more.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Mistress at home?” he asked, lowering his voice.</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye: busy at work. I’ll just look in there and be back.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, come to us!” he said, and would have made more
inquiries; but, though it was late, people were still about;
moreover, the boy, a feather-headed fellow, might blab and
let things out. So he walked on swiftly, looking round
when near the church to see if he was watched, and then
turned aside, taking a path that ran by the granaries.
Vitek meanwhile made for the cabin.</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna had not come yet: the family room was in
shadow, save for the brands which glowed dully on the
hearth. Yagna was preparing the evening meal, and in
evil humour; for Yuzka had gone off again somewhere, and
there was so much to do, one did not know what to begin
first. She gave no heed to what Vitek said, until he mentioned
Antek’s name; it arrested her attention and she
paused in her work.</p>

<p class="c004">“Tell no one that he gave you money!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Since mistress forbids me, I’ll not breathe a word of it!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Here are five kopeks more, for you to remember.—Did
he go home?”</p>

<p class="c004">Without waiting for an answer, she suddenly ran out
into the porch, calling for Pete, whilst she peered into the
orchard and court-yard, with searching, yet frightened
glances. She even went out to look beyond the shed and
about the haystack. No one was there.... This quieted
her, but also tried her patience. She rated Yuzka for not
having given the cows their drink, and for her continual
<span class="pageno" id="Page_122">122</span>idleness; to which the little girl, being bold and fierce and
by no means tongue-tied, was not slow to answer back.
And they had a quarrel, each saying very sharp things.</p>

<p class="c004">“Gabble, gabble your fill! your father is coming, and his
strap will silence you!” she threatened her, lighting the
lamp, and taking up her spinning again. Yuzka went on
grumbling, but no one replied to her; Yagna had just
heard, she thought, someone passing outside the corner
window.</p>

<p class="c004">“Vitek, look outside; I think that one of our swine has
got out of the sty and is in the orchard now.”</p>

<p class="c004">But he assured her he had driven them all in and made
the door fast. Yuzka went to the other side of the hut and
brought tubs, Pete helping her, for the cows to drink from;
then she ran for the milking-pails.</p>

<p class="c004">“I myself shall milk them; after so much labour, ye need
rest.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, milk them, do! Once more ye will leave the
udders half full!” Yuzka snapped at her.</p>

<p class="c004">“Hold your peace, you had best!” she cried in a fury,
as she put her clogs on, tucked up her petticoat, and went
to the cow-shed with a couple of pails.</p>

<p class="c004">Night had fallen, the wind was hushed, the white snow-mist
settling down. But the sky above hung black, starless,
packed close with small low-lying clouds; the fields loomed
a dark grey; an oppressive lull prevailed everywhere. Not
a voice was heard in the village, nor any sound but the
hammers, beating, clinking, clinking, beating, on the anvil
in the forge.</p>

<p class="c004">In the byre it was close and dark; the kine were drinking
the water, and noisily licking, with muffled gurgles, the
bottom of the tubs as they emptied them.</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna groped and found the milking-stool, sat down by
the first cow in the row, felt her udder, wiped it clean, and,
propping her head against the animal’s flanks, began her
work.</p>

<p class="c004">The milk spurted rhythmically into the resounding pail;
the hoofs of the horses pawed in the adjoining stable; from
<span class="pageno" id="Page_123">123</span>the cabin, muffled, yet audible, came the noise of Yuzka’s
chattering.</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, she babbles and babbles, but does not peel the
potatoes!” Yagna muttered, bending a most attentive ear;
for now the snow outside was crackling under—it seemed
to her—the steps of someone coming from the shed....
They stopped ... all was still again ... they approached—the
snow crackled louder.—Turning her head toward the
glimmering outlines of the open door, she saw a figure dimly
silhouetted there.</p>

<p class="c004">“Pete!” she cried.</p>

<p class="c004">“Hush, Yagna, hush!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Antek!”</p>

<p class="c004">Motionless, palsy-stricken at the sight and words, she
could not articulate one syllable, nor even think. Instinctively
she went on milking, but the milk squirted on to
her petticoat, or fell on the ground. A fit of fever had
seized upon her; a gust, as it were, of fiery flame swept
through all her being, flashing lightnings before her eyes,
tearing at her heart-strings with delicious pain. And then
something caught her and throttled her so, she had like to
fall dead on the spot.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ever since Yule-tide,” he whispered, “I have been as a
watch-dog, waiting and watching for you, there, by the haystack
... and you did not come once.”</p>

<p class="c004">That voice of his! Strangled, passionate, flaming with
love, it overwhelmed her with the might of its clamorous
outcry to her heart, and of the sweet irresistible fire it bore.
He stood facing her, leaning (as she could feel) against the
cow’s flank, bending down and gazing upon her—so near
that she could feel his hot breath upon her brow.</p>

<p class="c004">“Do not fear me, Yagna. No one has seen; fear nothing....
I could bear it no longer, it was impossible: day and
night and always, you stand before mine eyes, Yagna.—Will
you not say one word?”</p>

<p class="c004">“What—what can I say?” she faltered tearfully.</p>

<p class="c004">Then they both were silent. Emotion made them mute,
and the very closeness of one to the other, the very solitude
<span class="pageno" id="Page_124">124</span>in common that they had so much desired, now took all
power from them, and weighed them down—a burden delightful
indeed, but fearful as well. They were irresistibly
drawn to each other, and yet it was now so hard to bring
out a single word! Their desire was mutual, and yet
neither could stretch forth a hand!</p>

<p class="c004">The cow, swishing her tail as she drank, struck him more
than once in the face, until he caught it in a firm grasp.
Then he bent down over Yagna still lower, and whispered
again:</p>

<p class="c004">“Sleep I cannot—nor eat—nor do aught without you, O
Yagna!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Things are not easy for me either.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yagna! did you ever think of me at all?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Was I able not to think? You arise in my thoughts
always.... I know no longer what to do.—Is it true that
ye did smite Matthew?”</p>

<p class="c004">“It is. He lied, slandering you: I have stopped his
mouth.... And I will deal likewise with anyone who does
so.”</p>

<p class="c004">The cabin-door slammed: someone came out into the yard
at a run, straight for the cow-house. Antek had but just
time to leap the manger and crouch there.</p>

<p class="c004">“Yuzka ordered me to take the tubs back; we must get
the food ready for the swine,” said Vitek.</p>

<p class="c004">“Take—take them all!” she answered, huskily.</p>

<p class="c004">“Nay; Lysula has not finished hers yet; I shall return
for it.” He hurried away, and they heard him bang the
house-door.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek emerged from his hiding-place.</p>

<p class="c004">“He is coming back, that imp! I shall go to the haystack
and wait.... Will you come to me, Yagna?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I fear....”</p>

<p class="c004">“Come, oh, come ... if but for an hour or so.—I shall
wait for you,” he entreated.</p>

<p class="c004">He came behind her, still sitting beside the cow, threw an
arm round her breast in a strong embrace, bent her head
back and kissed her mouth with so powerful an intake of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_125">125</span>the breath, that she herself could not breathe. Her arms
fell to her sides, the pail rolled along the ground. But,
straining up towards him, she kissed him back with such
wild vehemence that they both closed as in a death-grapple;
each fell into the other’s arms; and so they remained awhile
locked in that one mad, frenzied, delirious kiss.</p>

<p class="c004">At last he tore himself away, and slunk out of the byre.</p>

<p class="c004">She would now have sprung after him, but he was on the
threshold and vanished like a shadow into the night. Yet
still she could hear his muffled whisper, and it wrought on
her senses with such fiery and commanding power that she
looked around, astounded to see him no more. No, he was
not there—only the kine, chewing the cud and whisking
their tails. She looked out into the yard, where—beyond
that threshold—reigned night impenetrable, and silence was
lord, save where the forge-hammers beat and clinked afar.—But
he <i>had</i> been there, had stood by her side, had hugged,
had kissed her. Her lips were yet burning, the flame was
running through her still, and an unuttered shout of gladness
echoed within her heart.—“Antek!” she cried aloud;
and the sound of her own voice brought her partly back
to her senses.—She set to milking as fast as she could, but
was so dazed that she more than once sought the udder between
the beast’s forelegs, and was so beside herself with
gladness that she never knew her face was wet with tears
till, as she returned to the cabin, the cold air blew on her
cheeks. She brought the milk, but forgot to strain it out,
and ran round to the other side of the hut under the impression
that she had something urgent to do.... What it
was, she could not remember: the one thought that filled
her mind was that Antek waited for her by the hayrick.
She took a few steps about the room, threw her apron over
her head ... and went out.</p>

<p class="c004">Very quickly did she round the hut, gliding along outside
the windows, to the narrow passage between orchard
and shed, which was nearly roofed over with drooping
snow-laden branches that bent so low, she had to stoop
down as she passed.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_126">126</span>Antek awaited her by the stile; he leaped forward, ravenous
as a wolf, and half carried, half dragged her to the
rick near the roadside.</p>

<p class="c004">But that day they were doomed to disappointment.
They had scarce got into the rick and joined lips in a kiss,
when, stern and loud, Boryna’s voice resounded.</p>

<p class="c004">“Yagna! Yagna!”</p>

<p class="c004">They sprang apart, as if struck with lightning. Antek
darted away, and ran crouching along the fence; Yagna
hastened back to the court-yard. The boughs had torn her
apron off her head, and she was covered all over with snow;
but this she did not remark. She rubbed her face with
snow, took up an armful of firewood from the shed, and
walked deliberately into the cabin.</p>

<p class="c004">Old Boryna eyed her askance and somewhat strangely.</p>

<p class="c004">“I went to see about Sivula; she is lying down and
lowing.”</p>

<p class="c004">“But where have ye got covered with so much snow?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Where?—Oh, there’s a lot of it hanging like beards
down from the eaves; if you do but touch them, down they
come!” She gave the explanation jauntily, but turned her
face away from the fire, lest he should see her flaming
cheeks.</p>

<p class="c004">But she could not hoodwink Boryna. Without looking
her straight in the face, he could perceive very well that
she was blushing crimson, and that her eyes glowed feverishly.
A sort of vague uncertain suspicion crept into his
mind, and his jealousy snarled and crouched within him,
like a dog ready to bite. He pondered and thought very
long, and at last concluded that Matthew must have met
her and pushed her against the fence.</p>

<p class="c004">Nastka coming in just then, he thought he would get her
to speak.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah! What have I heard?—Your Matthew is well and
up by now, as it seems?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Well and up, indeed? Alas!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Someone told me he had met him in the village this
evening.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_127">127</span>“’Tis all mere talk. Matthew can hardly move, certainly
not rise from his bed. He spits no more blood,
though; Ambrose cupped him to-day, and prepared him a
drink—lard melted in strong vodka—and they are both
taking the medicine together so heartily that one can hear
their songs from the road!”</p>

<p class="c004">The old man put no more questions, but remained suspicious.</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna, tired of the moody silence, and abashed by his
fixed prying stare, related to him every detail of Mr. Yacek’s
visit.</p>

<p class="c004">He was greatly amazed; and, at a loss to conceive what
it meant, he took no small pains to find out, pondering
every word. He finally decided that the Squire had sent
Mr. Yacek to make sure what the Lipka folk thought about
the matter of the clearing.</p>

<p class="c004">“But he never so much as asked one word about the
forest!”</p>

<p class="c004">“When such a one begins, he leads you on and on, as
with a rope, and you know neither when nor how, but you
tell him all. Well do I know that brood of manor-folk!”</p>

<p class="c004">“He asked only about Kuba and the figures stuck upon
the wall.”</p>

<p class="c004">“‘To find the road, he walks along a side-path.’ Yes, in
all this there is some trick or other of the manor-folk.
What? the brother of the Squire troubling about Kuba?
’Tis true, this Yacek is, they say, not quite sound of mind—always
wandering about the villages, playing his violin
where holy figures stand, and talking senseless talk.—Did
he say he would come again?”</p>

<p class="c004">“He did, and asked about you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Well, well, this is beyond me.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And had you a talk with the Squire?” she asked him
pleasantly, wishing to turn his mind away from what had
just occurred.</p>

<p class="c004">He winced, as though stung in some most tender part.</p>

<p class="c004">“No. I was at Simon’s.” And he said no more.</p>

<p class="c004">So they sat together in gloomy silence until supper-time,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_128">128</span>when Roch came in. He sat down by the fire, according
to custom, but would not eat. When they had done, he
said, in a low tone:</p>

<p class="c004">“I have not come here for myself. They tell me, the
Squire is deeply offended with the Lipka folk and will not
employ one peasant of the village to hew down his trees.
I have come to ask if this is the truth.”</p>

<p class="c004">“In God’s name, my man, how should I know? It is
news to me!”</p>

<p class="c004">“But a council was held at the miller’s to-day; the news
has come thence.”</p>

<p class="c004">“The Voyt, the miller, and the smith were there: not I.”</p>

<p class="c004">“How so? They tell me that the Squire was here to-day
to see you, and you went out with him.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I have not seen him, and I speak the truth: believe me
or not, as you choose.”</p>

<p class="c004">But how this truth had stung him, and the fact that he
had been slighted had stung him, he did not say.</p>

<p class="c004">The very thought exasperated him; he held his tongue
nevertheless, ruminating over the bitter grievance, and controlling
himself with a great effort, lest Roch should guess
at what he felt.</p>

<p class="c004">How now? He had been waiting, <i>he!</i> and they had held
their council, and left him out of it! That he would not
pass over.—A nobody in their eyes, he would show he was
somebody in the village.... It was the miller’s doing: he
had made a fortune by wronging the people, and was now
above everyone. That cheat! of whom he knew enough to
send the fellow to prison!... And the Voyt, forsooth!
one fit rather to feed cattle than command his betters—a
vile drunkard, whose office, if they only elected him, Ambrose
might take, and fill it as well as he!... The blacksmith
too, his pestilential son-in-law! Let the brute but
come again to Boryna’s cabin!... And then the Squire—that
wolf, always prowling and sniffing round to snatch
what he could from the people! A noble, dwelling on the
peasants’ lands, selling the peasants’ forests, living but by
the peasants’ sufferance; and he durst come there to plot
<span class="pageno" id="Page_129">129</span>against them! Could not the wretch understand that a
flail would strike as hard on a noble’s back as on anyone
else’s?—However, he let none of these thoughts escape him
in words. They pained him exceedingly, they tortured
him; but that was his business and no one else’s. And,
remembering presently that such silent brooding in the
presence of a guest was unseemly, he rose and said:</p>

<p class="c004">“Ye bring strange news; but if the Squire be resolved
and will not change his mind, I see no means of forcing
him.”</p>

<p class="c004">“True; yet if some honourable man were to set before
him the harm the people would suffer thereby, he might
decide otherwise.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I,” Boryna exclaimed tartly, “will by no means intercede!”</p>

<p class="c004">“But consider: there are a score of <i>Komorniki</i> here, all
eager for work to do. Ye know them, and know how
severe this winter is. Some have their stock of potatoes
frozen, and are out of work. Ere spring comes, the misery
among them will be frightful. Even now, many families
have only once a day warm food to eat. They all reckoned
that, when the Squire had his trees in Vilche Doly
felled, there would be work enough for everyone. And
now it is said that he has vowed he would not take one
man from Lipka, being angered because they brought a
complaint against him to the commissioner.”</p>

<p class="c004">“That I signed myself; and I will stand by it. He shall
not fell one sapling without our consent.”</p>

<p class="c004">“If so, then he will perchance not fell any trees.”</p>

<p class="c004">“None, at least, on our land.”</p>

<p class="c004">“But,” Roch faltered, “what will become of those poor
men?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I cannot help their fate, nor give up our rights that
they may work for him. I may stand up to defend others
from wrong; but when I am wronged, who will be on my
side? My dog, perhaps?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Then I see ye are not a friend of the manor.”</p>

<p class="c004">“A friend of myself—and of justice. Of naught besides.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_130">130</span>And I have other matters to think upon. If Voytek or
Bartek has no food to eat—that is the priest’s affair, not
mine! With the best will, I cannot alone provide for all.”</p>

<p class="c004">“But help to provide ... and help not a little,” Roch
replied, sadly.</p>

<p class="c004">“Try carrying water in a sieve: how much will ye bring
in? ’Tis even so with poverty.—And to me it seems a divine
ordinance that some should have possessions, and others
only the air they breathe.”</p>

<p class="c004">Roch bowed his head and went out, much grieved. He
had expected less harshness towards human sufferings from
Boryna. The latter saw him to the gate, and—as customary
with him—went round to give a last look at the cows
and horses ere going to bed.</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna, murmuring her evening prayer, was beating up
the contents of the feather-bed she was making, when Matthias,
coming in, cast a piece of cloth at her feet.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ye lost your apron: I found it by the stile!” he said,
very quietly, but with such harsh emphasis and a look so
keen and searching that she was petrified with fear, and it
was some seconds before she could stammer out some words
to explain things.</p>

<p class="c004">“’Twas ... ’twas that Lapa.... Mischievous brute!
... always making off with something ... took my clogs
to his kennel the other day.—Always up to some mischief!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Lapa?—I see.—Aye, aye,” he muttered with grim irony,
positive that she had lied to him.</p>
<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_131">131</span>
  <!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER VII</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">On Twelfth Night, which that year fell on a Monday,
the folk were slowly filing out of church, even before
Vespers were over. For they heard from the
tavern the music and singing, and made their way towards
the inviting sounds. It was now that, for the first time since
Advent, music was permitted; now, too, that Margaret
Klemba and Vincent Soha celebrated their betrothal. The
latter, though bearing the same name as the deceased Kuba,
denied any relationship with him, being of those who pride
themselves on their acres alone.</p>

<p class="c004">Also, it was whispered that Staho Ploshka (who had since
the potato-harvest been making up to Ulisia, the Soltys’
daughter) would surely that evening come to the point and
settle everything with her father over a bottle. The latter
was known to have objected to the match, not wishing for a
son-in-law such a quarrelsome fellow, fickle besides, never
on good terms with his parents, and demanding either four
whole acres of land or two thousand <i>zloty</i> in cash and a
couple of cows into the bargain, as Ulisia’s dowry.</p>

<p class="c004">That day, too, was the christening at the Voyt’s; and
though the festivities were to be held at home, most who
knew him expected that, as soon as the company should be in
convivial mood, he would adjourn to the tavern and stand
them drinks there all round.</p>

<p class="c004">Besides these attractions, there were also greater and
more serious matters, which concerned all the people
equally.</p>

<p class="c004">They had, as it happened, learned after High Mass from
the people of the other hamlets that the Squire had already
engaged all the hands he needed at the clearing: ten from
Rudka, from Modlitsa fifteen, about eight from Debitsa,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_132">132</span>and of the “nobility” of Rzepki<a id="r10"/><a class="c002 pginternal" href="#f10"><sup>[10]</sup></a> hard upon a score; from
Lipka, not one single man. It was a fact, for the forester
had been at High Mass, and had told them so.</p>

<p class="c004">The poor were in consternation.</p>

<p class="c004">There were indeed in Lipka a great many wealthy families.
And there were others, too, not so well off, but to whom this
mode of earning money did not appeal. And others, again,
though in distress, would never own to it, in order to keep
up appearances and friendly relations with the wealthy men
with whom they invariably held.—But there were also the
<i>Komorniki</i>, and such as possessed only a hovel to live in.
Of these, some worked on the farmers’ threshing-floors, some
wielded axes at the sawmill, some did any work that came
to hand, and (with the help of the Lord) scraped together
enough to live upon. And, besides these, there were still
five families that could get no work at all in the village:
these had been looking forward to tide the winter over by
work done on the clearing.</p>

<p class="c004">What were they to do now?</p>

<p class="c004">The winter was terrible. Few of them had any savings;
some had even finished their stock of potatoes, and starvation
was staring them in the face. They had to wait till spring,
with no help in sight: small wonder, then, that they were
sorely troubled in mind. They assembled in their huts to
discuss matters, and in the end came to Klemba in a body,
begging him to go with them to his Reverence, and seek his
advice. Klemba excused himself, pretexting his daughter’s
betrothal. Others whom they tried shirked the troublesome
duty, wriggling out of it like eels, and caring only for themselves
and their own profit. This enraged Bartek (him of
the sawmill), who, though he had work, was always on the
side of the poor. He therefore took with him Philip, who
<span class="pageno" id="Page_133">133</span>lived over the water, Staho (old Bylitsa’s son-in-law), and
Bartek Koziol and Valek the Wry-mouthed: with these
four he went to beg his Reverence to plead for them with the
Squire.</p>

<p class="c004">They were closeted with him a considerable time, and only
after Vespers did Ambrose hurry to tell Kobus that they were
in conference with the priest, and would come over to the
tavern.</p>

<p class="c004">Evening was falling meanwhile; the last fires of sundown
were burnt out in the west, save for a few grey ashes that
glimmered red like dying brands; and the country-side was
slowly being wrapped in the mantle of the night. No moon
was up as yet, but from the hard-frozen snow some chill icy
gleams were reflected, making things appear as if shrouded in
a winding-sheet. Stars peeped forth from the overhanging
darkness—specks that swelled and shrank tremulously in the
deep space, and shone bright with sparkling reflections on
the snow. And the frost grew so bitter that men’s ears tingled
and the slightest noise seemed to echo over all the land.</p>

<p class="c004">But in the huts the fires blazed, and folk went busily
about their evening duties: when in the yard and the enclosures,
they bustled with furious haste, the frost burning their
faces like a hot iron and strangling the very breath within
them; but all was very quiet in the streets and lanes.</p>

<p class="c004">Not in the tavern, however. Here the musicians made a
joyful noise, ever louder and louder. People were there,
come from almost every hut: some to look about them, some
(whom neither betrothals nor serious affairs interested) allured
by the scent of the vodka. Women to whom solitude
at home was irksome, and girls fond of romping with boys
and hearing the band play, had slipped away stealthily before
the gloaming, ostensibly to take the men home with
them; but they stayed on themselves. Children too, especially
boys in their teens, had followed their fathers; whistling
to one another about the messuages, they had gathered
in groups, loitering inside and outside the tavern porch, in
spite of the cruel frost which bit them.</p>

<p class="c004">The tavern was well crowded. A big fire roared up the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_134">134</span>chimney, flooding half the public room with blood-red light.
Each man, on entering, stamped to clean his boots on the
hearth, warmed his numbed hands, and then went to seek his
own set in the throng: no very easy matter, for, notwithstanding
the fire and the lamp hung over the bar, it was
dark enough in the corners. In one of these the musicians
sat, playing only now and then, and not very willingly: the
dances had not properly begun yet, though an impatient
couple or two were already whirling round and round.</p>

<p class="c004">The walls were lined with people, sitting at tables all
along them, and in separate companies. But few of these
drank much; they conferred together, and looked with a
wistful eye on all who came in.</p>

<p class="c004">There was most noise about the bar, where Klemba’s invited
guests and Soha’s kinsmen were standing; but even
these were for the most part talking, and behaving with
great propriety, as was the right thing at betrothals.</p>

<p class="c004">Many darted furtive glances towards the window, where
about fifteen men of Rzepki were sitting at table; they had
come before any, and still kept their places. No one insulted
them, but no one showed them goodwill either, except
Ambrose, who made friends with them at once, drank much
vodka, and told them as strange stories as they could swallow.
Close by stood Bartek of the sawmill, with his friends, telling
them what his Reverence had said, and inveighing loudly
against the Squire. He was noisily supported by Voytek
Kobus, a wiry little man, so fierce that he was all the time
banging his fists on the table and boiling over with rage.
This he did on purpose, guessing that the Rzepki men there
present were going to fell the trees next day. Not one of
them, however, took up his provocation, but they talked
among themselves as if they had heard nothing.</p>

<p class="c004">Nor did any of the <i>gospodarze</i> there take it much to heart
that his Reverence had been unwilling to plead for them with
the Squire. On the contrary, the more noise the others made,
the more these avoided them, turning away among the crowd.
This was not difficult, the throng being so thick and making
so much din that each man could, at his ease and regardless
<span class="pageno" id="Page_135">135</span>of his neighbours, choose the society he preferred.
Only Yagustynka passed from group to group, here with a
word of mockery, there with a merry jest, or whispering low
some bit of gossip—but always attentive to go where bottles
passed round and glasses clinked.</p>

<p class="c004">After a time, and by slow degrees, the people’s fancy
turned to merry-making. The noise had by now become an
uproar, the glasses jingled oftener, the door opened incessantly
to let new guests in. At last the musicians, being
well plied with liquor by Klemba, struck up a brilliant
mazur; and Soha, with his Margaret, led off, followed by as
many couples as cared to dance.</p>

<p class="c004">These were not many in number. Most of the folk, seeing
the first dancers in the place—Ploshka, Stach, Vahnik, the
Voyt’s brother, and many more—sitting and talking in nooks
and corners, preferred to hold joyous converse together, or
to jeer, half aloud, at the “nobility” of Rzepki, to whom Ambrose
was constantly paying court.</p>

<p class="c004">Then Matthew appeared, leaning on a stick, drawn from
his bed for the first time by his longing for society. He at
once ordered vodka boiled with honey, took a seat by the
fireside, and set to drinking and joking with his acquaintances.
Suddenly he stopped. Antek was standing in the
doorway; who, seeing him, drew himself up proudly and,
after shooting one glance at the man, would have passed
on as if he did not exist.</p>

<p class="c004">But Matthew exclaimed excitedly:</p>

<p class="c004">“Boryna! come hither to me!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Come ye yourself, if ye have aught to say,” was Antek’s
curt reply: he thought the other meant to attack him.</p>

<p class="c004">“I would; but I cannot walk yet without a stick.”</p>

<p class="c004">Antek, mistrusting him, passed on with an ominous frown;
but Matthew caught him by the arm, and made him sit down
at his side.</p>

<p class="c004">“Seat yourself here.—You have shamed me before all
men; you have beaten me so, they had to call the priest in!
But I bear you no grudge, fellow, and come first with words
of peace.—Here, drink with me, boy! No man had ever
<span class="pageno" id="Page_136">136</span>beaten me, and I thought no man could.—Wondrously
strong you are, truly!—To toss up a man like me as a truss
of straw ... good heavens!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ye were ever harrying me as I worked.... And then
ye let out foul speech: it made me furious, I knew not what
I did.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, you speak true, and I confess it: not from fear, but
with a willing mind.—But how ye did clapperclaw me!
Why, I lost my best blood, and have many a rib broken....
Well, to you, Antek, I drink.—What, man! forgive and
let hate die! I, too, forget all ... as well as my shoulders
will let me!... But are you indeed stronger than Vavrek
of Vola?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Did I not, on Indulgence Day, last harvest-time, thrash
him so that I hear he is not well yet?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Vavrek! They told me that, but I would not believe it....
Here, you Jew! Rum! And ‘essence’ to flavour it
this instant, or I trounce you soundly!”</p>

<p class="c004">“But ... ye vaunted of something in public,” Antek
said, lowering his voice; “surely it was not true?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Nay, I spoke out of spite and at random. Nay, how
could that be true?”—But, as he made this denial, he held the
bottle to the light, looking through, lest Antek should read
the truth in his eyes.</p>

<p class="c004">They drank once, then once more; then it was Antek’s
turn to stand treat, and they emptied their glasses anew.
And so they sat, quite as brothers, and on such friendly terms
that all in the tavern were amazed. Matthew, who had
taken more than a drop too much, yelled to the musicians to
play faster, stamped and roared with laughter, and then
spoke in Antek’s ear.</p>

<p class="c004">“So much is true: I did long for her to be mine; but she
scratched me so, I was like one dragged face down through
the brambles. Yes, she preferred you, I know it well; and
even had she not, she would never have cared for me.
’Tis hard to lead an ox against its will. And I was sorely,
how sorely! stung with jealousy. The girl is wonderfully
<span class="pageno" id="Page_137">137</span>fair—none fairer in the world. But how she ever could
marry that old man—and to your hurt—I cannot think!”</p>

<p class="c004">“To my hurt? Aye, and for my perdition too!” Antek
began, but stopped short. Here his memory kindled within
him such a flame that he muttered an inaudible oath, and
said no more.</p>

<p class="c004">“Peace, lest tale-bearers hear you!”</p>

<p class="c004">“What have I said?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Nothing that I could hear; but others might.”</p>

<p class="c004">“It is unbearable—my heart is torn asunder!”</p>

<p class="c004">“I tell you: while ye can, get the better of it!” he said,
cunningly striving to win his confidence little by little.</p>

<p class="c004">“Can I do so? Since love, far worse than sickness, burns
in the bones, festers in the heart, and fills me with such
craving, I can neither eat nor work nor sleep, and would
like to dash my brains out to rid me of my life!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, I know all about that. Lord, how I once ran after
Yagna!—But when love comes, there is one thing to be
done: marry, and it will at once pass away and vanish. If
one cannot have the wife, why, then, the sweetheart: and
immediately desire will be quenched, and love will die.
I tell you the truth, and am not without experience,” he
added, with pride.</p>

<p class="c004">“And what,” Antek asked, sadly, “what if it shall not
pass even then?”</p>

<p class="c004">“That,” he returned scornfully, “is the lot of none but
those that sigh in groves, and lurk round corners, and
tremble to hear a petticoat rustle!”</p>

<p class="c004">“What you have said is true,” Antek replied, in deep
thought.</p>

<p class="c004">“Come, man, drink to me: my throat is dry even to the
bottom thereof.—The foul fiend take all women! Such a
one, so weak you could fell her with a breath, will lead the
strongest man as a calf led with a rope, rob him of strength
and reason, and make him a laughing-stock to all! She-devils
they are, every one of them, and the spawn of Satan,
I tell you!—Now, drink to me!”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_138">138</span>“Here’s to you, brother!”</p>

<p class="c004">“God bless you!—I say, a fig for all that devil’s spawn!...
But ye know what they are, well enough.”</p>

<p class="c004">They went on drinking and talking. Antek was somewhat
flustered; and never having had one to whom he could
tell his sorrow, he now felt a burning desire to make a clean
breast of it. And though he refrained and controlled himself,
he dropped a significant word or two here and there;
these, though he gave no sign, Matthew noted well.</p>

<p class="c004">And now the fun in the tavern was growing to its height.
The band worked away with might and main. One dance
followed another; drink was quaffed at every table; all
raised their voices, often in dispute, so that the public room
resounded with the hubbub; and the feet of the dancers
drummed on the floor like the beating of flails.</p>

<p class="c004">Klemba and his party now adjourned to the private room,
and there too the noise was no trifle; but Soha continued
dancing furiously with his Margaret, and at times went out
with her into the open air, with their arms round each other’s
waists.</p>

<p class="c004">Bartek of the sawmill and his people, who still stood
where they had been before, were now at their second bottle,
with Voytek Kobus shouting insults into the ears of the
Rzepki Folk.</p>

<p class="c004">“Nobles in rags and tags, with naught but bundles and
bags!”</p>

<p class="c004">“With but a couple of kine, the common property of the
whole village!” another screamed.</p>

<p class="c004">“Long lousy locks warrant well-born wights!”</p>

<p class="c004">“See them, the Jews’ hirelings!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Let them be leashed with the manor hounds! Both scent
a good thing from afar!”</p>

<p class="c004">“What they scented, they now have got!”</p>

<p class="c004">“They come to snatch away the work that is our due!”</p>

<p class="c004">“The good-for-nothing vagabonds! They come because
the Jews would hire them no more.”</p>

<p class="c004">To these shouts some added gestures, shaking their fists
<span class="pageno" id="Page_139">139</span>and pressing forward in full cry; and they were soon surrounded
by a ring of angry peasants in liquor. But they
said not a word, and sat close together, with their sticks
clenched in their hands, drinking only beer, munching the
sausages they had brought with them, and eyeing the peasants
with a bold undaunted stare.</p>

<p class="c004">A fight would perhaps have taken place, but that Klemba
how came upon the scene, soothing, beseeching, explaining
matters; and the older men, and Ambrose with them, spoke
in the same sense. At last Kobus ceased to taunt them, and
the others were taken away to the bar for a drink. The
band played a tune, and Ambrose set to telling them the
most incredible tales—about the wars, and Napoleon, and
Kosciuszko—and funny things that made them almost split
their sides with laughter.</p>

<p class="c004">And presently Klemba’s party poured out of the private
room, coming in a body to join in the dance; which increased
the uproar to such an extent that no voice could any
more be distinguished in the universal clamour.</p>

<p class="c004">Heated with liquor, they waxed merrier and yet merrier,
the young people capering and footing it lustily, while their
elders huddled together where they could, hustled and driven
back by the dancers, who whirled round in a constantly expanding
circle.</p>

<p class="c004">The band played enthusiastically now, and the dances
went on with a lively swing, though the partners were so
many, there was scarce room to turn; they pushed and
shoved one another, laughing and shouting gaily, making the
floor groan, and the bar with the glasses and bottles jingle
to their tread.</p>

<p class="c004">In short, it was a splendid festival, in which everyone was
taking his fair share.</p>

<p class="c004">Winter was now at its height. Those weary arms that had
so long delved the ground, were resting now; those forms
once bowed, bowed down no longer: all were equal in
freedom and repose, and the blithe thought that each enjoyed
his own separate and distinct individuality. Even so in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_140">140</span>the forest, the trees that in summer-time present only a
confused mass of greenery stand out clearly when the
winter snow has fallen and veiled the earth, and each
particular tree—be it oak or hornbeam or aspen—is at
once recognized.</p>

<p class="c004">Just so was it here and now with the village folk.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek and Matthew alone remained in their places, sitting
side by side, like good friends, and talking in low voices of
many a thing. At times one or another of the men would
join them, and say a few words. Staho Ploshka came; so
did Balcerek, the Voyt’s brother, and all those foremost
young men in the place who had been bridesmen at Yagna’s
wedding. They felt at first embarrassed, uncertain whether
Antek would not receive them with some sarcastic speech.
But he shook hands with all, with friendly looks beaming in
his eyes; and they presently came round him, listened to all
he said, and were again as friendly as they had been of old,
when he was foremost among them all. Yet, remembering
that only the day before these very men would have slunk
from his way if they had seen him at a distance, he could
not repress a bitter smile at times.</p>

<p class="c004">“We never see you now! The tavern knows you no more,”
said Ploshka.</p>

<p class="c004">“At work from dawn till night, when can I find time?”</p>

<p class="c004">Then they went on to discuss other village topics—their
fathers, the lasses, the hard winter weather. Antek spoke
little, glancing at the door whenever it opened, in the hope
of seeing Yagna coming in. But when Balcerek told them
of the meeting held at Klemba’s concerning the forest, he
roused himself and inquired what they had decided.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, what indeed? They whined and complained and
lamented ... and decided at last that they ought not to
allow it to be felled!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Men of straw!” cried Ploshka. “What can be expected
of them? They meet, drink vodka, groan, sigh ... and the
outcome of their meeting is as last year’s snow. The Squire
may safely cut down every tree in the forest.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_141">141</span>“That,” Matthew put in, curtly, “cannot be allowed.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Who is to prevent him?” they all asked.</p>

<p class="c004">“Who? Why, you!”</p>

<p class="c004">“But,” said Ploshka, “we are not free to act. Once I
spoke—father silenced me. The business was not mine, but
theirs, the husbandmen’s. I was to let it alone, and blow my
own nose. And really, they have the right to speak so.
All is in their hands: we have no more say in the matter
than the farm-servants.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And that’s unjust.”</p>

<p class="c004">“The younger generation ought to have a share in the
land and the management.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And our elders to retire on an allowance.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I,” Ploshka exclaimed, “have served in the army, my
prime is passing, and yet my father refuses me what is my
own!”</p>

<p class="c004">“It is time we all had what’s ours.”</p>

<p class="c004">“All here are wronged.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Antek most of all.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Let us set matters to rights in Lipka!” said one, in a
hoarse voice. This was Simon, Yagna’s brother, who had
but just come, and was standing behind the others. They
eyed him with astonishment, as he pushed forward and
spoke hotly of the wrongs he had to suffer. But as he met
the young fellows’ eyes, he blushed very red, unaccustomed
as he was to speak in the presence of many, and also standing
as yet somewhat in awe of his mother.</p>

<p class="c004">“’Tis Nastka has taught him thus much sense,” they
laughed. Thereupon Simon said no more, but withdrew to a
shady corner; and Gregory Rakoski, the Voyt’s brother,
though no great speaker and somewhat given to stammering,
began to hold forth.</p>

<p class="c004">“Our fathers keep the land to themselves, and their children
out of it. This is wrong and iniquitous. But the worst is
that they manage things foolishly. If they had come to an
agreement with the Squire, the question of the forest would
have been settled long ago.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_142">142</span>“How’s that? For every fifteen acres of forest, he offered
only two of his land, and we had a right to four.”</p>

<p class="c004">“A right? That is a question to be decided by the
officials.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Who take the Squire’s part.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Not so. The commissioner himself advised us not to
accept two acres: so the Squire will have to offer more,” Balcerek
observed.</p>

<p class="c004">“Hush now,” said Matthew; “here comes the smith, and
an old man along with him.”</p>

<p class="c004">They turned and saw in the doorway the smith, who was
arm in arm with an old man. Both had been drinking, and
they pushed forward, straight on to the bar, where they,
however, remained but a short time, the Jew ushering them
into the private room.</p>

<p class="c004">“They have been feasting at the Voyt’s.”</p>

<p class="c004">“What, was the christening to-day?” Antek inquired.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, yes,” Ploshka explained; “all our elders are there.
The Soltys was godfather, and the godmother, Balcerek’s
wife: Boryna, it seems, was offended and refused.”</p>

<p class="c004">“But who,” Balcerek cried, “is the old man here?”</p>

<p class="c004">Gregory enlightened him: “He is Mr. Yacek, brother to
the Squire of Vola!”</p>

<p class="c004">They all stood up to look at him. Mr. Yacek was pressing
forward slowly, evidently seeking someone. At last his
eyes met Bartek of the sawmill, and he went with him to the
wall against which the men of Rzepki sat in a row.</p>

<p class="c004">“What does the man want here?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, he is always wandering about the villages, talking
with peasants—sometimes helping them—playing on his
violin, teaching the girls to sing songs: he must be a little
crazy.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Pray, Gregory, go on with what you had to say.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, about the forest?—I was saying that we should not
leave the matter in the hands of the old men: they would
bungle it.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Well, but,” Antek said with decision, “there is only one
thing to be done: if they set about felling our timber, we
<span class="pageno" id="Page_143">143</span>must all of us go and drive them away, until such time as the
Squire shall come to terms.”</p>

<p class="c004">“That is just what they said at Klemba’s.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Said, yes: but what can they do? No one will go with
them.”</p>

<p class="c004">“The husbandmen will.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Not all of them.”</p>

<p class="c004">“All, if Boryna leads them!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Which is doubtful.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Then,” Balcerek cried hotly, “let Antek be our leader!”</p>

<p class="c004">The proposal was enthusiastically assented to. But Gregory,
having seen something of the world, and having a little
book-learning, set to point out to them, like the scholar that
he was, that violence would be no remedy; that all would
end in court, and with sentences of imprisonment; and that
the right thing was for the people to apply to a lawyer
from the town.</p>

<p class="c004">But no one agreed with what he said; some even jeered at
him. This put him in a great rage, and he said:</p>

<p class="c004">“Ye complain that your fathers are fools, whilst ye yourselves
are as great fools as they, and talk nonsense, all of you,
like children at their games.”</p>

<p class="c004">Someone here said: “See, Boryna has come, with Yagna
and some girls.”</p>

<p class="c004">Antek, who had intended to answer Gregory, left him unanswered
at the words.</p>

<p class="c004">They had come late, after supper. The old man had long
resisted Yuzka’s whimperings and Nastka’s entreaties, for he
wanted Yagna to join with them in begging him. Now, she
had said at once, after dinner, that she would go to hear
the band play, and he had told her sternly that she should
not set her foot out of doors!</p>

<p class="c004">She did not ask him a second time, but cried in corners,
and slammed doors, and rushed about by fits and starts, in
a gusty way. And when they had supper, she would eat
nothing, but set about getting ready to go, and taking her
best skirt out of the chest to try it on.</p>

<p class="c004">What was the man to do? He swore a lot, talked, said
<span class="pageno" id="Page_144">144</span>again that he was not going anywhere—and finally he had
very humbly to ask her forgiveness and, willy-nilly, go to
the tavern.</p>

<p class="c004">He entered with a haughty imposing mien, saluting few
of those present, for few of his equals were there, most of
them being at the Voyt’s for the christening. He looked
round carefully for his son, but missed him in the crowd.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek gazed on Yagna all the time, as she stood by the
bar, while the lads crowded round her begging for a dance.
She refused them all, but chatted gaily with them, now and
then casting a quick glance here and there. Very lovely did
she look that night, and they all eyed her with admiration,
the fairest amongst all the women. Yet Nastka was there,
arrayed in red, like a tall hollyhock; and Veronka Ploshka,
like a peony in bloom, stately and self-possessed; and Soha’s
daughter, a mere chit of a lass, but so slender and lithe and
sweet to look upon! and many another strapping well-favoured
girl, who pleased the lads—as did Mary Balcerek,
divinely tall, shapely with firm white flesh, and the very
best dancer in the village; but not one of them, not a single
one, could vie with Yagna.</p>

<p class="c004">By her beauty, her attire, and her marvellous turquoise
eyes, she surpassed them all, as the rose does the hollyhock,
the peony or the poppy-flower, making them appear paltry
and plain beside it: so was she above and beyond them,
every one. And that evening she had dressed herself as for
a wedding: had donned a skirt of rich yellow, striped with
white and green; and her bodice of deep-blue velvet, embroidered
with gold thread, was cut low, disclosing half of
her bosom; and on her chemise of fine linen, with dainty
frills, frothing and foaming abundantly about her throat
and hands, there hung many a necklace of coral and amber
and pearl-like beads. And her head was adorned with a
silken kerchief of turquoise-blue, with pink spots, the corners
of which floated down on to her neck behind.</p>

<p class="c004">For this finery and sumptuousness of adornment, the
women’s tongues wagged against her with bitter reviling.
But she cared not a whit for all they said: she had beheld
<span class="pageno" id="Page_145">145</span>Antek. Colouring with delight, she turned to her husband,
to whom the Jew had said something. He thereupon went
over to the private room, and remained there.</p>

<p class="c004">This was precisely what Antek had been waiting for. He
at once elbowed his way through the throng, and welcomed
them with easy familiarity. But Yuzka sullenly turned her
back upon him.</p>

<p class="c004">“Have ye come for the band, or for Margaret’s betrothal?”</p>

<p class="c004">“For the band,” Yagna replied, in a voice husky with emotion.</p>

<p class="c004">They stood for a while side by side, speechless but breathing
fast, and casting side-glances at each other. As the
dancers jostled them and drove them towards the wall, Simon
took possession of Nastka, Yuzka drifted away somewhere
or other, and the couple remained alone.</p>

<p class="c004">“How I have waited day by day ... waited for you!” he
whispered.</p>

<p class="c004">“How could I come? I am watched closely,” she answered,
with a thrill, for their hands had somehow come together,
and they stood at close quarters, hip touching hip.
They both turned pale, their eyes gleamed, and within them
other and ineffable music was striking up.</p>

<p class="c004">“Pray let me go, and stand away a little,” she begged; for
they were surrounded with people.</p>

<p class="c004">He did not reply, but took her round the waist in a firm
grasp, pushed the crowd aside, and, entering the circle of
dancers, called out to the musicians:</p>

<p class="c004">“An obertas, boys, and a first-class one!”</p>

<p class="c004">And how they struck it up, and how the bass-viols growled!
For well they knew that Antek, when in a good mood, was
lavish of drinks and of money.</p>

<p class="c004">His comrades and friends all followed his lead—Ploshka,
Balcerek, Gregory, and the rest: while Matthew, whose ribs
would not let him join them, stamped upon the floor and
shouted encouragement.</p>

<p class="c004">Dancing recklessly, Antek soon took the place of the foremost
couple, and rushed on, faster and faster still, thought
of nothing, cared for nothing whatever, for Yagna was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_146">146</span>pressing close to him and entreating him tenderly, again
and again, the while gasping to find her breath:</p>

<p class="c004">“More, Antek! Pray, yet a little more!”</p>

<p class="c004">They danced long, very long, stopping only to take breath
and drink a glass of beer; then once more they started off,
never noticing that folk were watching them, and whispering—or
even uttering aloud—their disapproval.</p>

<p class="c004">But Antek no longer cared for anything in the world, now
that he felt her at his side, and pressed her to himself till
she closed—closed with delight—those dear blue eyes of
hers: he had forgotten himself completely—forgotten men
and the whole world of men. His blood was at boiling-point,
and he knew his strength to be waxing within him,
bold, invincible, and filling his bosom full of the sense of
force. As to Yagna, she was entirely plunged in the oblivion
of love. He was carrying her off along with him—a
fiery dragon!—and she neither made nor could make resistance;
so masterful was he, bearing her on in his strong
embrace, that now and again her eyes would be darkened,
and she could think of nothing else but the bliss, the unutterable
joy of her youth: the blackness of his brows, his
unfathomable eyes, and the crimson allurement of his
mouth!</p>

<p class="c004">And the violins were all the time playing, as in an enchanted
dream, a tune as genial as the harvest breeze, a
tune that turned the blood into fire, and made the heart to
throb with mighty gladness; and the bass-viols rumbled
with a quick jerky cadence, forcing the feet of the dancers
to accompany their lilt: while the flute warbled as entrancingly
as a blackbird in the springtime, and opening the
heart so, and filling it with such rapture, that you quivered
all over, your brain swam, you breathed no more, you longed
to weep, to laugh, cry out, hug, kiss—and fly away somewhere,
out, out into the vast world!</p>

<p class="c004">So on they danced, till the tavern shook, and the barrels
on which the musicians had their stand shook too.</p>

<p class="c004">In the circle of dancers there were about fifty couples,
swaying from wall to wall. Sometimes the lamp would
<span class="pageno" id="Page_147">147</span>burn low or go out quite; and then the brands on the hearth
would fling their ruddy blood-red glow on the dim forms
that flitted by, so vague that one could in no wise know
which they were—men or women. One saw but waving
capotes, skirts, ribbons, aprons, flushed faces, bright eyes,
and a mad din of clattering, singing and shouting—all
mingled together in one whirling, twirling, swirling, calling,
bawling, brawling, stamping, tramping, ramping mass!</p>

<p class="c004">Of them all, Antek was the most boisterous and the liveliest,
beating the floor with noisy heels, wheeling hither and
thither like a whirlwind—falling down in homage, so that
they thought he had stumbled—up again with a shout or
a song for the musicians to take up after him—he passed
round and round, a hurricane that scarce any could follow.</p>

<p class="c004">For a full hour he continued thus, indefatigably. Others
fell out, exhausted; the musicians’ hands were weary with
playing: he threw them money, urging them to play as fast
as he could dance. In the end, he and Yagna were almost
the only couple that held out.</p>

<p class="c004">The women were loud in their amazement at such behaviour
and, while they censured it, expressed their pity for
Boryna; which Yuzka overhearing, and moved more by
hatred for her stepmother than by her grudge against Antek,
went to tell Boryna what was going on. But the latter,
deep in matters of village politics with the elders and with
his son-in-law, scarcely heard what she said.</p>

<p class="c004">“Let them dance: the tavern is surely for that,” he said.</p>

<p class="c004">She returned, disappointed, but set to watch them carefully.
They were then just after a dance, standing at the
bar, in company with many lads and lasses. It was a merry
moment; for Ambrose, now completely drunk, was telling
them such tales that the girls threw their aprons over their
heads, and the lads laughed uproariously. And Antek was
treating them all round—drinking to them first, pressing
them to drink, taking the boys’ arms in a friendly squeeze,
and putting caramels into all the lasses’ bosoms by handfuls—that
he might deal likewise by Yagna.</p>

<p class="c004">Thus they were all diverting themselves pretty well; all
<span class="pageno" id="Page_148">148</span>the company was in the gayest key. Even the “nobility”
of Rzepki had left their table, having made it up with the
Lipka folk over some glasses. Several of them, too, had
offered to dance, and the girls had not refused them: their
behaviour was so much more refined, and they asked them
with so great courtesy.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek’s set revelled apart from the others. They were of
the younger generation, and of the first people in Lipka.
As to him, though he talked with them all, he had no idea
what he was talking about—neither knew nor cared: he
concealed nothing, and could conceal nothing, for he could
not help doing what he did then. But it was all the same to
him! He continually whispered in Yagna’s ear, pushing
her nearer and nearer to the wall; his arm was round her
waist, her hand in his; he could scarce restrain himself from
kissing her in public. His eyes wandered, with a wild look,
a tempest raged in his heart, and he would have dared to
do no matter what, reading, as he did, in those turquoise-blue
eyes of hers, her admiration and her love. It raised his
pride to heights unknown, and he felt himself so exalted
that he must needs cry and shout aloud in ecstasy. Then
he drank again, and forced Yagna to drink, till her clouded
mind no longer knew what had come to pass. Only at
times, when the music paused, and there was a lull in the
tavern din, did she return a little to her senses, and look
around in terrified bewilderment, seeking help—she knew
not whence. At such moments, she would even have fled;
but he was close by, gazing on her, and the fire in his eyes
kindled in her such love that at once she forgot everything.</p>

<p class="c004">This went on for a pretty long time. Antek stood drinks
to all the company, whom the Jew served very willingly,
chalking up every litre twice upon the door.</p>

<p class="c004">Their heads were now turning, and they all went to
dance together, thinking it might sober them a little; and
Antek with Yagna led the dance.</p>

<p class="c004">At that moment, out of the private room came Boryna,
whom the women, shocked at what was going on, had
brought to see. Instantly he understood everything, and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_149">149</span>was transported with rage. He buttoned up his capote,
seized his fur cap, and pushed on to Yagna. They made
way for him, shrinking from the old man’s face, pale as
death, and his eyes that glared with fury.</p>

<p class="c004">“Home!” he commanded in a loud voice, as the couple
approached, and tried to seize her arm. But Antek, spinning
on his heel, bore her away, so that she could not free
herself from him.</p>

<p class="c004">And then Boryna, leaping forwards, broke through the
ring of dancers, tore her from Antek’s arms, and never let
her leave his grasp till they were out of the tavern. He
had not so much as glanced at his son.</p>

<p class="c004">Thereupon the band ceased playing; a sinister silence fell
upon them all, and they stood as though petrified. All
saw that some awful thing was about to take place; for
Antek had gone out after them, pushing the throng aside
like sheaves of corn and rushing into the night. But the
sudden and intense cold made him giddy; he stumbled over
a tree-trunk that lay in front of the house, and into a snow-drift.
Rising swiftly, however, he came up with them
at the turning of the road by the pond.</p>

<p class="c004">“Go your ways and let folk be!” the old man cried, turning
upon him.</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna ran shrieking into the hut; but Yuzka put a heavy
cudgel into her father’s hand, screaming:</p>

<p class="c004">“Down with that ruffian, dad! down with him!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Let her go ... let her go!” Antek vociferated, quite
beside himself, coming on with clenched fists to the attack.</p>

<p class="c004">“Off, I say! or, as there’s a God in heaven, I kill you like
a dog! Off!” the old man cried again, ready to strike a
crushing blow.... And Antek instinctively shrank back;
his arms fell to his sides. A sudden panic had taken hold of
him; he shuddered with dread, and let his father go slowly
home.</p>

<p class="c004">He had no longer even the thought of leaping after him
as he went away, but stood trembling, distracted, and casting
bewildered looks around. No one was there; the moon
shone, the snows sparkled, a sombre whiteness made things
<span class="pageno" id="Page_150">150</span>just visible. He could not understand what had taken place,
and only came partly to his right mind a little later, when
brought back to the tavern by the friends who had come out
to render assistance, having heard there had been a fight
between him and his father.</p>

<p class="c004">The merry-making was all over now, and the people were
going to their homes, for it was late. The tavern had now
emptied itself, but there were, along the road, a few shouts
and cries. No one remained but the folk of Rzepki, who
were to spend the night there, and to whom Mr. Yacek was
playing such weirdly and wailingly mournful airs that they
sighed as they sat listening, elbows on table and arms propping
chins. Antek moped all alone in a corner, apart from
the others: talk with him was out of the question; for when
they spoke, he would not answer. There, then, he sat dazed
and stunned, and the Jew reminded him in vain that the
house was about to close: he neither made out nor heard
what was said. It was only at Hanka’s voice, who had been
told he had again come to blows with his father, that he
roused himself.</p>

<p class="c004">“What do you want?” he snarled.</p>

<p class="c004">“Come home. It is late,” she said beseechingly, restraining
her tears.</p>

<p class="c004">“Go yourself. With you I will not go.—Away, I tell
you!” he cried in a threatening voice. Then, on a sudden,
moved by some unaccountable impulse, he came close and
hissed in her ear: “Were I chained and fettered in a prison
cell, I should still be more free than with you beside me—far
more!”</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka withdrew at once, weeping bitterly.</p>

<p class="c004">The night was moonlit and serene. The trees threw long
bluish-silvery shadows. The frost nipped very hard, making
the fence-hurdles crackle from time to time, and a sort
of quiet rustling sound rise up from the scintillating snow.
Save for this faint susurration in the still night, all the land
lay silent. The villagers slept; no light came from any
window, not a dog barked, mill and mill-stream were alike
soundless. Antek could just hear—faint like a sound heard
<span class="pageno" id="Page_151">151</span>in sleep—the husky voice of Ambrose, singing (according
to his wont when drunk) in the middle of the road.</p>

<p class="c004">With slow and heavy steps, he plodded round the mill-pond,
stopping at times to cast bewildered looks from side
to side, and listening with dread to his father’s awful words,
that were still ringing in his ears. Still, too, did he see
those stern, fierce, baleful eyes: they pierced him like a knife!
Instinctively he winced before them: terror gripped him by
the throat, his heart sank within him, and his hair stood
on end. And they blotted out from his thoughts all the
impetuosity of erewhile—all his headstrong love and passion—everything
but mortal dread, trembling dismay, and a
wretched sense of weakness and despair.</p>

<p class="c004">After a time he unconsciously set his face homewards.
As he went, a pitiful cry, a voice of lamentation, reached
him from near the church. Someone just beneath the statue
which stood in front of the lich-gate lay on the snow, with
arms outstretched as one crucified; but in the shade which
fell from the churchyard wall, he could not discern who
it was. He stooped down, thinking it was some homeless
wanderer, perhaps overtaken by drink. And there, imploring
the mercy of God, lay Hanka!</p>

<p class="c004">“Come home ... the cold is fearful ... come, Hanka!”
He spoke with entreaty, his soul melting strangely within
him. She answered nothing. Then he lifted her up and
took her home.</p>

<p class="c004">All the way, they were mute. But Hanka wept grievously.</p>
<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_152">152</span>
  <!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER VIII</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">After that Twelfth Night, Boryna’s house became
like a tomb. No weeping, no clamour, no invectives:
but a sinister silence dwelt there, telling of rancour
and suppressed resentment.</p>

<p class="c004">Everybody in the house was now taciturn, veiled in gloom,
living in the continual expectation of some awful thing about
to take place, as under a roof that one knows may at any
time crash down upon one’s head.</p>

<p class="c004">Neither on his return to the hut, nor even the next day,
did Boryna say a single sharp word to Yagna. Nor did he
complain to Dominikova: he kept silence about all that
had happened.</p>

<p class="c004">But the paroxysm of anger he had felt made him ill: he
was unable to rise from his bed, had continual qualms, a
stitch in his side, and fits of fever now and then.</p>

<p class="c004">“’Tis nothing much; only the liver is inflamed, or perhaps
the womb has changed position,” was Dominikova’s
diagnosis, as she rubbed his side with hot oil. He replied
nothing, but groaned heavily, staring at the rafters above.</p>

<p class="c004">“It was not Yagna’s fault, indeed it was not!” she said,
speaking low, lest they should hear her from the other room.
She felt extreme uneasiness at his saying no word to her
about the happenings of the night before.</p>

<p class="c004">“Whose then?” he muttered.</p>

<p class="c004">“What evil has she done? Ye left her, and went away to
drink in the private room; the band played, and all the
folk danced in the other. What then? Ought she to have
sat alone in a corner? She is a young healthy woman, and
needs to be amused. Well, he was urgent, and she danced
with him. Could she help it? In the tavern, everyone has
the right to choose his dancer. He—that wretch! choose
<span class="pageno" id="Page_153">153</span>her, and would not leave her alone ... all out of spite
against you!”</p>

<p class="c004">“’Tis good ye rub me to set me on my legs again; but I
will take no lessons from you. I know the truth of the
matter quite well.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Are ye so wise? Then should ye know that a young
woman in good health needs some pleasure. She is not a
log of wood, neither is she an old dame: she married a
man, and a man she must have. Not a decrepit veteran,
with whom she can only tell her beads! No, no!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yet ye gave her to me in marriage: wherefore, then?”
he asked, with a sneer.</p>

<p class="c004">“Wherefore? And who was it came whining like a dog?
Was it I who implored you to take her? Did I entice
you ... or did she? Why, she might have wedded anyone,
aye, and of the first in Lipka: so many were after her!”</p>

<p class="c004">“After her, yes; to wed her, no.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yelping cur! May your tongue rot off!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah! the truth is a stinging nettle to you!”</p>

<p class="c004">“’Tis no truth, but a wicked lie!”</p>

<p class="c004">He drew up the blanket over his chest, turned his face to
the wall, and answered not one word more to all her heated
arguments; only, when she at last burst into tears, he whispered
mockingly:</p>

<p class="c004">“‘If a woman’s tongue fail, she thinks tears will prevail.’”</p>

<p class="c004">On the point in discussion, he had come to a strong conviction.
Whilst he was laid up, the things he had heard
of old against Yagna had all come back to him: he had
pondered them well in his mind, gathered them together,
and thought them over.—And now such bitter exasperation
took hold of him for his inability to quit his bed, that he
would toss upon it all day with silent angry curses, following,
with the fierce eyes of a falcon, every step that
Yagna took. She, pale and drooping, would go about the
house like a sleep-walker, looking at him with the wistful
eyes of an ill-treated child, and sighing so deeply that he
could not but feel some compassion for her—though her sighs
inflamed his jealousy still more.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_154">154</span>And so things dragged on in the hut till Sunday. She,
who by nature was extremely sensitive, could hardly bear
it any more, and, like a delicate flower that feels the first
touch of frost, began to pine and waste away. Daily she
looked worse and worse, could sleep no more, was unable to
sit still, and spoiled all she did, her work slipping through
her fingers. She lived in perpetual dread besides. The old
man still kept his bed, moaning, saying never one word of
kindness to her, but fixing his gloomy hostile eyes upon her
constantly, until she could no longer support it. Life was
a burden. And also she was deeply distressed and anxious
at getting no more news from Antek. Since Twelfth Night
he had never come, though more than once, in spite of the
mortal fear she was prey to, she had repaired to the hayrick.</p>

<p class="c004">Of course she durst ask no one for news of him.
And by this time she loathed her cabin so heartily that she
would several times in the day run out to see her mother.
But Dominikova was mostly either visiting patients or in
church, and, when at home, had only sour looks and bitter
reproaches for her. The lads, too, went about moody and
sullen, ever since their mother had taken a flax-swingle to
Simon for having spent four whole <i>zloty</i> in drink at the
tavern on Twelfth Night! To get through the day somehow,
Yagna would also look in at the neighbours’; but with
them too she felt ill at ease. Without telling her to begone,
they let their words drop sparingly, sifting them, so to
speak: all were very, very sorry that Boryna had fallen
ill, and had much to say against the evil times in which
they lived.</p>

<p class="c004">Yuzka, too, did all she could to annoy her at every step.
And Vitek feared to chatter as he had used to do, now his
master was of such grim humour. So no conversation was
possible with anyone; she had no solace, no diversion at
all, save with Pete of an evening, when he played the violin
quietly to her in the stable after his day’s work, old Boryna
having forbidden him to play in the hut.</p>

<p class="c004">The winter, moreover, was so severe with daily frosts and
blizzards that she often could not go out at all.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_155">155</span>But when Saturday came round, Boryna, though not yet
quite well, dragged himself out of bed, put on warm clothes
against the intense cold, and ventured out.</p>

<p class="c004">He called at several huts, ostensibly to warm himself, or
to talk of business, and now chatted willingly with some
that he would formerly have passed by without a word.
He always managed to bring the conversation round to the
tavern incident, giving the whole affair a comical turn: he
had, he said, been most ridiculously tipsy that night.</p>

<p class="c004">Wondering, they agreed with him, nodding sagacious
heads; but they were not taken in, all the same. They knew
too well that headstrong pride of his, for which he would
let himself be roasted alive without uttering a cry.</p>

<p class="c004">They quite understood that he came on purpose to give
the lie to any malicious tales that might have been circulated.</p>

<p class="c004">Old Simon, the Soltys, even told him as much quite
frankly, as his custom was:</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Fiddle-de-dee, fiddle-de-dee!—One fable and two make
three.’ Gossip is like fire: ye shall not quench it with your
hands—only burn them.—Let me repeat to you what I said
before your wedding: ‘He that takes for a wife one that
might be his daughter, for his pains gets a fiend who will
scorn holy water.’”</p>

<p class="c004">He went home, offended. Yagna, thinking all was over
now he had got up, felt relieved, tried to talk and look
sweet and be loving and joke with him as before. But he
met her advances with so crushing a word that she shuddered
to hear it; and no change in him took place with
time. He no longer caressed or petted her at all, nor anticipated
her wishes, nor cared to win her smiles. If anything
was in disorder, he would scold her and drive her to
work like a common servant-girl.</p>

<p class="c004">And thenceforward he took everything in hand again,
looked after all by himself, and saw to everything with his
own eyes. For days together, after his recovery, he
threshed corn with Pete, and winnowed it in the granary,
scarcely ever leaving the premises even for an instant. His
<span class="pageno" id="Page_156">156</span>evenings, too, he spent at home, mending harnesses, or repairing
domestic implements. She could take no step out
of doors without his going to look for her; and he went so
far as to lock up her Sunday clothes and keep the key in his
pocket.</p>

<p class="c004">How she suffered, how she suffered! Not content with
rating her soundly for the slightest shortcomings, with never
a word of praise, he treated her just as if she were not the
mistress of his house. It was with Yuzka alone that he
took counsel about what was to be done, explaining what
she did not understand, and ordering her to have an eye
to everything. For days together, she did nothing but
spin at home, almost distracted. She went to complain to
her mother, who set herself to plead for her, but in vain.</p>

<p class="c004">“She was mistress,” Boryna replied, “and did whatever
she pleased, and lacked naught. But she has failed to act
up to her position: let her now try something else! And,
hark ye! tell her that, so long as I can move my limbs, I
will defend what is mine, and not suffer myself to be a
laughing-stock, or branded with the name of cuckold! Let
her bear that in mind!”</p>

<p class="c004">“But, good heavens, man! she has done you no injury
whatever!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, if she had, I should speak and act otherwise! It
is enough for me that she has had to do with Antek!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, ’twas at the tavern ... in a dance ... in the
presence of everyone!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oho! Only at the tavern? Indeed?” For he shrewdly
guessed that at the time when he found her apron, she had
been out to meet Antek.</p>

<p class="c004">No, he was not to be talked over. His faith in her was
gone, and his mind quite made up about her. At last:</p>

<p class="c004">“I am,” he said, “a kind-hearted and a good-natured
man: all know that.... But ‘strike me a blow with a whip,
I at once hit back with a cudgel!’”</p>

<p class="c004">“Hit the guilty, all right: but beware of hitting wrong.
Every wrong cries out for vengeance.”</p>

<p class="c004">“When I defend my right, I do no wrong.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_157">157</span>“Aye, but find out betimes how far your right extends.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Is this a threat?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I say what I think. Ye are too self-confident: take heed.
‘Who to another gives an evil name, himself deserves the
same.’”</p>

<p class="c004">“I have enough of all your proverbs and your lectures!”
Boryna angrily rejoined.</p>

<p class="c004">Seeing the man’s stubbornness, Dominikova gave up the
attempt, and did not try again. She hoped the storm would
blow over and things take a better turn; but he did not for
an instant swerve from the line he had taken up; he never
wavered in his severity, and even tasted a grim pleasure in
it. Sometimes, indeed, hearing Yagna weep of nights, he
instinctively started up to go to her side—but, remembering
in time, would walk to the window and look out.</p>

<p class="c004">A couple of weeks elapsed in this way, without any change.
Yagna was wearied out, melancholy, and so wretched-looking
that she could scarcely bear to be seen by people;
she was ashamed before the whole village, for everyone
knew what was going on at Boryna’s.</p>

<p class="c004">This cast a deep and mournful shadow on his home, and
it became the abode of apprehension and of silence.</p>

<p class="c004">Few people, it is true, came to call upon them. The
Voyt, offended at Boryna’s refusal to come to his child’s
christening, no longer darkened his door. Now and then,
Dominikova’s sons looked in; Nastka came with her distaff,
but chiefly to see Yuzka or meet Simon. Roch, too,
now and again showed himself there, but never for a long
visit, seeing such sullen gloomy faces.</p>

<p class="c004">The smith alone came every evening, and for a long stay,
each time embittering the old man against Yagna as much
as he could: for he had again got into Boryna’s good graces.
Yagustynka, besides, dropped in frequently, enjoying their
quarrels, and adding fuel to the fire with great relish.
Dominikova, present daily, daily preached to Yagna the
duty of winning her husband back by submission and humility.</p>

<p class="c004">It was of no use. Yagna could not humble herself; for
<span class="pageno" id="Page_158">158</span>her life, she could not. On the contrary, she felt more resentful
every day, more inclined to revolt against his rule.
Yagustynka did a good deal to make this inclination
stronger. She said to her one day:</p>

<p class="c004">“O Yagna, I do grieve for you—aye, as though you were
my own daughter! That hound, to ill-treat you so! and
you bear it all like a lamb! Another woman would not
behave in that wise. Oh, no!”</p>

<p class="c004">“And how then?” She put the question with some curiosity,
having more than enough of the present state of
things.</p>

<p class="c004">“You will not overcome evil with good, but only make
the evil worse. He uses you as a common wench, and ye
let him. He has locked up your things, they say; he dogs
every one of your footsteps, and never gives you one word
of comfort; and you, what do you do? Sigh, moan, and
wait for Heaven to set matters right. Ah, but Heaven helps
those that help themselves! Were I in your place, I know
well what I should do. First, I should flog Yuzka till she
gave up meddling with the household. Are ye not the mistress
here?—Then, I would not yield in aught to the goodman.
Will he have war? Then let him have war till he
is sick of it. Aye, aye! Let him but get the upper hand,
and he will soon come to beating you ... and how far he
will go afterwards I cannot tell.”</p>

<p class="c004">“But first of all”—here she lowered her voice and spoke
in her ear—“let him be as a calf weaned from its mother.
Let him perforce keep himself to himself, and be like a dog
left outside on the threshold. Ye will soon see how much
milder and better-behaved he will grow.”</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna turned aside to hide her scarlet blushes.</p>

<p class="c004">“What, ashamed? Foolish girl! Why, all do likewise,
and will ever do so: this is no new discovery of mine. A
dog follows a piece of bacon: even so, and more so, does a
petticoat allure a man! Of an old man, this is still truer,
he being more self-indulgent, and less likely to find comfort
elsewhere.—Do as I say, and ye will thank me soon.—And
as to what folk say of you and Antek, do not take it to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_159">159</span>heart; were you white as driven snow, they still would think
you sooty. But it is the way of the world: all rise against
the meek, if they but crook their finger; and who is proud
and determined may do what the devil he pleases, no one
will dare to raise his voice against him, but all will fawn
upon him like curs. The world belongs to the strong, the
dauntless, the resolute.—Oh, they slandered me not a little
in my time ... and your mother as well.—About Florek
... a matter well known to all.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Let my mother be!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, well! may she ever remain a saint in your eyes....
We all must needs hold someone for a saint.”</p>

<p class="c004">She went on with these instructions. Little by little, and
unasked, she began to tell her things about Antek—things of
her own invention, but interesting. Yagna listened with
greedy ears, though careful not to betray herself in any
wise. But she thought well all day of the advice given; and
in the evening, when the smith, and Roch, and Nastka were
present, she said to her husband:</p>

<p class="c004">“Hand me the key of my chest: I must air my things.”</p>

<p class="c004">He was ashamed to refuse, with Nastka tittering at his
side; but after she had put the clothes back, he stretched out
his hand for the key.</p>

<p class="c004">“In the chest there are only my own garments: I am quite
able to keep the key by myself!” she boldly replied.</p>

<p class="c004">That evening marked the commencement of a new state
of things in the cabin: life there became a hell. As stubborn
as the old man was obstinate, to any rebuke of his she replied
in a voice that might be heard out in the road. She
pounced upon Yuzka wherever and whenever she could, and
more than once inflicted so severe a beating on her that the
girl ran crying to complain to her father. And complaints
were of no avail: she persecuted her still more fiercely afterwards,
when Yuzka had not obeyed. Her evenings she decided
to spend on the other side of the passage, leaving her
husband alone, and ordering Pete to come there and play to
her, and accompany the ditties she would sing till late at
night. And on Sundays, dressed in her very best clothes, she
<span class="pageno" id="Page_160">160</span>went to church without waiting for Boryna, and talked to
the farm-servants on the way.</p>

<p class="c004">Wondering at this transformation, he raged and fumed,
but did his best to withhold the knowledge of it from the
village. She was not to be put down; and, little by little,
he began to overlook her whims in order to have a quiet life.</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, good dame,” he once exclaimed to Yagustynka,
“she was even as a lamb before—the gentlest of ewe-lambs;
and behold, she butts now like a ram!”</p>

<p class="c004">“She has waxed fat, and is too full of fodder!” Yagustynka
replied with indignation; she always took the part of anyone
that asked her advice. “But let me tell you, ye should
drive out these humours of hers with a stick betimes, lest
ye may not prevail later, even with a club!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Such was never the custom of the Borynas!” he returned,
in a lofty way.</p>

<p class="c004">“Yet methinks,” she spitefully remarked, “that even the
Borynas will have to come to that!”</p>

<p class="c004">A few days later, just after Candlemas, Ambrose came in
the afternoon to tell them the priest would come the next
day for the <i>Kolendy</i><a id="r11"/><a class="c002 pginternal" href="#f11"><sup>[11]</sup></a> visit.</p>

<p class="c004">All the morning they were busily engaged in a general
cleaning. The old man, to avoid hearing Yagna continually
abuse and upbraid Yuzka for all she did, had gone out to
sweep the snow about the premises. The rooms were given
fresh air, the walls cleared of cobwebs; Yuzka strewed the
porch and passage with yellow sand, and they all arrayed
themselves in their very best attire; for the priest was now
not far off, officiating at neighbour Balcerek’s.</p>

<p class="c004">Presently his sledge stood outside the porch; and he, with
his surplice over his fur, and accompanied by two of the
organist’s sons in choir-boys’ robes, entered the cabin. Before
him, Boryna carried a deep plate, full of holy water.
He said some Latin prayers, sprinkled the rooms, and then
went out to bless the farm-buildings and all the man’s possessions,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_161">161</span>passing round and saying the sacred words aloud,
the organist’s boys walking on either side of him, singing
Christmas carols, and untiringly ringing and swinging their
little jingling bells. Boryna carried the holy water before;
the others walked behind, in procession.</p>

<p class="c004">All being over, he returned to the cabin to rest; and while
Boryna, aided by Pete, was putting fifty litres of oats,
and half as many of pease, in the priest’s sledge, he was
listening to Yuzka’s and Vitek’s prayers, which they repeated
to him in the cabin.</p>

<p class="c004">They knew them perfectly. Who had taught them? he
wondered.</p>

<p class="c004">“Kuba taught me my prayers; Roch, my catechism and
my primer!” the lad answered boldly. The priest patted
him on the head, and gave each of them a couple of pictures.
Then he told them to obey their elders, never neglect prayer,
and beware of sin. “For Satan, whithersoever we go, is on
the watch, ready to drag us down to hell.” Then, raising
his voice, he concluded with a solemn warning:</p>

<p class="c004">“And this I say unto you, that nothing, no, nothing is
hidden from the eye of the just God. Beware therefore of
the day of judgment and of doom: repent ye, and mend
your ways whilst it is yet time!”</p>

<p class="c004">The two children burst into tears, feeling as at church during
a sermon. And Yagna’s heart throbbed with dread, and
a deep blush overspread her face; she knew those words were
meant for her, and as soon as Matthias returned she left the
room, without daring to raise her eyes to the priest.</p>

<p class="c004">“I should like to have a talk with you, Matthias,” he said,
when they were alone together. Motioning him to a seat by
his side, he cleared his throat, offered him snuff, used a
beautifully scented pocket-handkerchief, and, making his
finger-joints crack one after another, began quietly:</p>

<p class="c004">“I have heard—yes, Matthias, I have heard of what took
place in the tavern not long ago.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, indeed,” the old farmer returned, with a pained
look; “it was public enough, to be sure.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_162">162</span>“Do not go to the tavern, and do not take your womenfolk
thither: how often have I forbidden it! I wear my
lungs out in beseeching you.... No use!—Well, ye have
received what you deserved.—Nevertheless, I thank God
most heartily that in all this there has been no very grievous
sin. I repeat: no grievous sin.”</p>

<p class="c004">“None?” Boryna’s face brightened: he did not distrust
the priest.</p>

<p class="c004">“But I have also been told that you are punishing your
wife very severely for what has happened. This is not just,
and injustice is a sin. A sin.”</p>

<p class="c004">“How’s that? I am only holding her in with a tighter
hand. I am only....”</p>

<p class="c004">Here the priest interrupted him, saying excitedly: “Antek,
not she, was at fault! It was to spite you that he forced
her to dance with him; evidently he wanted a scene. A
scene.” Of this he felt quite sure: Dominikova, in whom
he reposed much confidence, had given him her account of
things.—“What else had I to say to you?—Ah, yes! Your
filly wanders loose about the stable. You must tie her up,
else one of the horses may injure her with a kick. Last year
I had my mare lamed that way.... Whose is her sire?”</p>

<p class="c004">“The miller’s.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I was sure of it—knew it by her colour and the white
spot on her forehead.—A fine filly!—But, as to Antek now:
you and he should be reconciled: your disagreement is
driving that young fellow to evil ways.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I did not begin the quarrel,” Boryna replied with decision,
“and I am not going to beg him to end it.”</p>

<p class="c004">“The advice I give you it is my duty as a priest to give.
As to taking it, follow what your own conscience says.
Only mark this well: he is going to his destruction, and you
let him go. He drinks continually in the tavern, is a fire-brand
among the young men, incites them to revolt against
their elders, and—as I hear—is plotting harm to the manor
folk.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Of that I knew nothing.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_163">163</span>“One tainted sheep infects the flock. And these plots
against the manor may result in great evil to the village
people.” But on this point Boryna was doggedly mute;
so the priest changed the subject, and said finally:</p>

<p class="c004">“Union, my dear friend, is the only thing. Union.” He
took snuff, put his fur cap on, and added: “Union and
brotherly love make the whole world go round. And that
is why the manor would willingly come to an agreement
with you. The Squire told me as much: he is a good man,
and would fain arrive at a neighbourly understanding with
everyone....”</p>

<p class="c004">“When a wolf is your neighbour, you can only come to an
understanding with a club or an ax!”</p>

<p class="c004">The priest started, shocked at the words, and looked him
steadily in the face; but, seeing the cold relentless expression
of his eyes and his set lips, turned away hastily, and
rubbed his hands, much upset.</p>

<p class="c004">“I must away. Allow me to repeat that you ought not
to set your wife against you by severe treatment. She is
young—flighty, too, as women are—and you should deal
with her wisely, and justly as well: be blind to one thing,
deaf to another, and overlook a third. Thus ye may avoid
unpleasant scenes, which might have most evil consequences.
Yes: our Lord has a special blessing for peacemakers. For
peacemakers.—Oh! what on earth is this?” he suddenly exclaimed,
much startled; for the stork, hitherto standing motionless
by the chest, had unexpectedly pecked with all its
might at the priest’s well-polished boot.</p>

<p class="c004">“It’s only a stork, that remained here in autumn, with a
broken wing, and Vitek took care of it, and nursed it till
it got well again. Now it stays in the hut with us, and
catches mice as well as any cat could do.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Really? I never yet saw a tame stork. Curious, most
curious!”</p>

<p class="c004">He bent down to give Bociek a caress; but this it would
have none of, and with curved neck meditated another
sly attack on the priest’s boot.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_164">164</span>“Upon my word, I like it so much that, if you would sell
it, I would gladly buy it of you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Sell it? Not I. But the lad shall take it at once to
your Reverence’s house.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I will send Valentine for it.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, but no one save Vitek may touch it, and it obeys
him alone.”</p>

<p class="c004">They called the boy in; the priest gave him a <i>zloty</i> and
told him to bring it in the evening, after the round of the
parish had been finished. Vitek cried much and, after the
priest’s departure, took Bociek with him to the byre, where
he blubbered aloud till dusk; then Boryna came to silence
him and remind him that the bird had to be taken; Vitek
unwillingly obeyed, but his heart melted in his breast, and he
went about, his eyes swollen with tears and like one half-witted,
now and then running to the stork, gathering it in
his arms and kissing it, weeping sorely all the while.</p>

<p class="c004">So, when the priest was home at nightfall, he wrapped
Bociek up in his own little capote, to protect it from the
cold, and (together with Yuzka, for the bird was too heavy
for him alone to carry) took it over to the priest’s:
Lapa accompanying them, and barking moodily all the
way.</p>

<p class="c004">Now, the more the old man weighed the priest’s words, and
his strong and evidently sincere assertions, the more satisfied
and tranquil did he become: so that, slowly and by imperceptible
degrees, he changed his attitude towards Yagna.</p>

<p class="c004">Yet, though things returned to their former state, the
former peace of mind, the deep quiet trust of old, was there
no longer.</p>

<p class="c004">As when a broken vessel has been repaired with wire
woven around it, it indeed looks whole, yet somehow leaks
and lets the water through, though the place of leakage is
invisible to the eye: so was it likewise in that hut: from
within that reconciliation, and through unseen fissures, the
secret mistrust it contained came forth by drops; and though
resentment was no more so keen, suspicion still remained
alive and undying.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_165">165</span>Hard as he tried, the old man could not quite rid himself
of his distrust. Almost unwittingly, he constantly had an
eye on Yagna’s every motion; and she, on her part, never
forgave his past anger and bitter words, and boiled with resentment
that now too she could not but notice how keenly
vigilant his eyes were.</p>

<p class="c004">Perhaps, too, the certitude that he was watching and put
no trust in her made her dislike him more violently, and
love Antek more.</p>

<p class="c004">She had managed things so dexterously that they often
met by the haystack. Vitek was their helper in this. Since
the loss of his stork, his master’s displeasure troubled him
not at all, and he had quite gone over to Yagna. She, on
her side, gave him better food to eat, and Antek very often
had a few kopeks for the lad. But their chief abettor in
this was Yagustynka, who had so crept into Yagna’s good
graces, and had so won Antek’s confidence, that they simply
could not do without her. She brought messages to and fro,
protected them from surprises on the part of Boryna, and
kept good watch over him. All this she did out of pure
hatred for people. She wreaked upon others her revenge
for the harsh treatment meted out to her. Though she detested
both Antek and Yagna, she detested still more the
old husband, who was one of the rich men in the village.
And yet she had for the poor not less of hatred and even
more of scorn!</p>

<p class="c004">In truth, she was diabolically wicked ... and possibly,
as folk whispered, evil in a yet more unearthly sense.</p>

<p class="c004">“They will,” she often said to herself, “one day fly at
each other, and fight it out like mad dogs.”</p>

<p class="c004">In winter there was but little to do; so she used to go
with her distaff from hut to hut, listening to the talk and
setting folk by the ears and laughing with impartiality at
everyone. None durst close their doors on her, partly out of
fear of her tongue, partly because she was thought to have
the evil eye. At times, too, she looked in at Antek’s, but for
the most part she met him on his return from work, and
brought him news from Yagna.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_166">166</span>About a fortnight after the priest’s visit, she saw the
young man on his way past the pond.</p>

<p class="c004">“Do you know? Old Boryna said many things to the
priest against you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Of what new thing has he been yelping?” was his contemptuous
answer.</p>

<p class="c004">“He says you stir folk up against the manor, and that the
gendarmes ought to arrest you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Let him but try! Ere they get hold of me, I would
make such a ‘Red Cock’ perch on his roof, that his place
would burn down to the ground,” he replied in a great rage.</p>

<p class="c004">She at once ran to tell the old man, who thought the news
over for a time, and then remarked: “’Tis like him, the
villain! He is the very man to do such a thing.”</p>

<p class="c004">He said no more, not wishing to take counsel with a
woman; but to Roch, who came in the evening, he told all.</p>

<p class="c004">“Do not believe whatever Yagustynka says: she is an evil-minded
beldame.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, it may be all a falsehood: yet such things have been.
Old Prychek burnt his father-in-law’s hut down for dealing
unjustly by him in dividing the land. True, he went to
prison, but he burnt it down.... And Antek may do the
same. And he must have said something; she could not
have made it all up.”</p>

<p class="c004">Roch, who was a kind-hearted man, felt greatly pained,
and tried to advise him.</p>

<p class="c004">“Make it up. Let him have a little land for himself: to
live, he needs the wherewithal. Besides, that would steady
him, and leave him without excuse for quarrels and threats.”</p>

<p class="c004">“No! Were I even to be quite ruined—made a beggar—no!
Beg I may, but, so long as I live, not one inch of my
land will I give up.... That he struck me and used me
shamefully, I could forgive, though hardly and with pain;
but should he attempt such a thing as this...!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Is it meet to take the tattle of a gossip so to heart?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I do not believe it, not I!—But what maddens me, what
makes my blood run cold, is that it <i>might</i> be true!”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_167">167</span>He sat with fists clenched, motionless and numb, at the
bare possibility of so heinous an act. He had no proof of
Yagna’s guilt, nay, he felt really sure she was innocent. But
he shrewdly guessed that in his son’s hatred for him there
was more than mere resentment for the land withheld; that
the wild reckless look he had seen in Antek’s eyes came from
some other cause. And he, too, was instantly aware of the
same feeling within himself—of cold, revengeful, implacable
hate. He turned to Roch, and muttered:</p>

<p class="c004">“There is not room enough in Lipka for us twain!”</p>

<p class="c004">“What—what can ye mean?” Roch cried in alarm.</p>

<p class="c004">“God forbid he fall into my hands, if I seize him in the
act!”</p>

<p class="c004">Roch did his best to calm him and bring him round, but
to no purpose.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, he would burn me out, would he?—That remains to
be seen!”</p>

<p class="c004">Thenceforward he had no peace. Every evening he
watched in secret, hiding behind corners, making the round
of the house and messuages, looking under the thatches; and
often, waking up at night, he would listen for hours together
or, jumping out of bed, go round the premises with his dog.
And once he saw certain faint traces about the haystack,
where the ground had been trampled. Later, he found marks
of footsteps near the stile, and became more and more convinced
that Antek had been there at night, and was only
seeking an opportunity to set the rick on fire. For as yet he
had no thought of any other possible outrage.</p>

<p class="c004">He purchased a very savage dog from the miller, chained it
up in a kennel under the shed, and made it more savage still
by starving and baiting it. At night he would set it free,
and then it would bark furiously and set upon anyone it
met. It bit several people so seriously that complaints were
lodged against Boryna.</p>

<p class="c004">But this vigilance and these precautions made the old
man weaker and weaker, though his eyes glowed with feverish
excitement.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_168">168</span>He had determined to speak and complain to no one any
more; this very greatly increased the intensity of his sufferings.</p>

<p class="c004">It also prevented anyone from guessing the cause of his
restless behaviour.</p>

<p class="c004">That he watched so carefully over the premises, and had
bought that dog, and made those nightly rounds, found an
easy explanation. That winter, wolves had multiplied to an
extraordinary degree; almost every night, they would approach
the village in packs, and the inhabitants often heard
them howl; not infrequently, too, they scratched holes under
the byres, and carried off something here and there. Moreover,
as was common enough just before the spring, cases of
theft became more rife. A peasant in Debitsa had been
robbed of a couple of mares; in Rudka, a hog had been
stolen; elsewhere, a cow was missing. Therefore did many
a man in Lipka scratch his head, and get better locks, and
keep good watch over his stables; for the horses there were
the very best in the district.</p>

<p class="c004">So the days went on, slowly, regularly, like the hands of
a clock—only neither to be pushed forward nor set back.</p>

<p class="c004">Not only was the winter uncommonly severe, but the
weather was also unusually changeable. There were such
frosts as the oldest inhabitants had never known; sometimes
the snow would fall in immense quantities; then it would
thaw for whole weeks together, so that the ditches were
filled with water, and the fields stretched out, black and
desolate: after which there would be whirlwinds and snow-drifts
such as the land had never seen as yet—and then a
spell of serene calm weather, when the lanes swarmed with
children, and the folk were glad, and the old people basked
against the warm sunny walls.</p>

<p class="c004">In Lipka things went on according to the everlasting ordinance.
He that was predestined to death died; whoso was to
be glad rejoiced; he that was fated to be sick confessed his
sins, and awaited the end. And so, with the help of God,
they continued to live on, from day to day, from week to
week.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_169">169</span>Meanwhile, every Sunday, the band played loud in the
tavern, and there they danced, quarrelled at times, or even
came to blows: wherefore the priest chid them sternly from
the pulpit, and many troubles came of it. Klemba’s daughter
married, and they enjoyed themselves, dancing for three
whole days; and—so folk said—Klemba had to borrow fifty
roubles of the organist to pay the expenses. The Soltys,
too, gave a fairly good banquet at his daughter’s betrothal
to Ploshka. Elsewhere there were christenings, but not
many now: numbers of women were expecting a child in
spring.</p>

<p class="c004">It was then that old Prychek died; after but one week’s
sickness he died, poor man! at only threescore and four
years of age. All the village went to his funeral, for his
children had made a grand funeral feast.</p>

<p class="c004">In certain huts they came together to spin, and so many
girls and farm-lads were there that they enjoyed themselves
perfectly, with plenty of laughter and gladness; especially as
Matthew, now quite well again, was mostly present, and the
life of the party wherever he went.</p>

<p class="c004">The village was thus alive and humming with continual
gossip and scandal; invectives now and then, and bickering,
or only bits of interesting news. And from time to time
there would come one of those <i>Dziads</i> who had seen and
could tell of many a place and thing; and such a one would
stay with them for many a week.</p>

<p class="c004">Or, again, a letter would sometimes come in from somebody’s
boy in the army. Oh, then!—how it was read over,
and commented on, and talked about, with lasses’ sighs and
mothers’ tears, for whole weeks and more!</p>

<p class="c004">What other topics were there? Well, Magda had taken
service at the tavern; and Boryna’s dog had bitten Valek’s
boy, who had threatened to bring an action; and Andrew’s
cow, stuffed too full of potatoes, had choked and swollen so
that Ambrose had to slaughter her; and Gregory had borrowed
a hundred and fifty roubles of the miller and given a
meadow in pledge for the sum; and the smith had bought a
couple of horses, a fact that made folk wonder very much;
<span class="pageno" id="Page_170">170</span>and his Reverence had been ill for a whole week, a priest
from Tymov coming to take the services in his place. They
talked of thieves besides; old twaddling women babbled of
ghosts; much was spoken about the wolves that were said
to have killed some of the manor sheep; about household
matters besides, and happenings in far-off countries, and I
know not what more—beyond telling or remembering. And
always there was something new, to make the day and the
long evenings full of interest.</p>

<p class="c004">So it was, too, at Boryna’s home; only he stayed in the
house continually, and neither went out himself nor would
let his family go anywhere. Yagna was wretched about it,
and Yuzka grumbled angrily all the day long. The cabin
life tired her mortally. The only solace she had was that
he did not forbid her to go spinning to those huts (but to
those only), where no young folk dwelt. Most of the time,
therefore, they stayed moping at home.</p>

<p class="c004">One evening—it was towards the end of February—several
people had come in, and were all sitting together in the other
lodgings, where Dominikova was weaving canvas cloth by
lamplight, and the rest of the company crowded round the
fire-place, because it was very cold. Yagna and Nastka spun
till their spindles hummed. Supper was preparing. Yuzka
pottered restlessly about the room, and the old man sat by
the chimney-corner, pipe in mouth, puffing away, and thinking
deeply.</p>

<p class="c004">The stillness was irksome to them all. Only the fire
crackled, a cricket chirped in a corner, the loom whirred at
regular intervals: but no one spoke. It was Nastka who
first broke silence.</p>

<p class="c004">“Are you going to spin at the Klembas’ to-morrow?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Roch has promised to be there, and to read a book about
our kings of old.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I should like to go, but I cannot tell as yet,” she replied,
with a questioning glance at her husband.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, pray do let me go, Father,” Yuzka begged.</p>

<p class="c004">He did not answer. The dog was barking loud outside,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_171">171</span>and in came Yasyek, nicknamed Topsy-turvy, looking about
him apprehensively.</p>

<p class="c004">“Shut the door after you, you gaby!” Dominikova shouted
at him. “This is not a cow-byre.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Do not be so frightened,” Yagna added; “no one will eat
you.—Why do you look round so?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Because of that stork.... He is somewhere in hiding,
belike, ready to peck at me!” he stammered, peering into
the corners in alarm.</p>

<p class="c004">“No,” Vitek growled in reply, “he will harm you no more:
Master has sent Bociek away.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And I cannot tell why ye kept the bird at all: he did
naught but mischief.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Be seated, and give over grumbling,” Nastka said, making
room for him by her side.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ha!” Vitek exclaimed complainingly, “whom did he ever
hurt save fools and strange dogs? He would walk the room,
strutting like any Squire.... And he caught mice ...
and was never in the way.... And now they have sent him
from us!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Be comforted: you will tame another when spring comes
round, since you care so much for storks.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Not I! This same one will ever be mine. I have a contrivance
to bring him to me, as soon as we shall have warm
weather: he cannot choose but come.”</p>

<p class="c004">Yasyek was most inquisitive as to Vitek’s contrivance; but
the latter told him rudely that what he could not find out
by himself he would not be told, and that only a fool could
be so greedy of another’s contrivances.</p>

<p class="c004">For this he was rebuked by Nastka, who took Yasyek’s
part; and indeed he was much in her thoughts. True, he
was rather foolish, and the village folk laughed at him; but
then he was an only child, with ten acres of land; whereas
(as she well knew) Simon had only five, and very possibly
his mother would not let him marry her; so she kept on
good terms with Yasyek, holding him in reserve, should
Simon fail.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_172">172</span>He was sitting by her side, staring at her, and thinking of
something to say, when in rushed the Voyt, who had by this
time made it up with Boryna. He called out from the
very threshold:</p>

<p class="c004">“News for you! You are to appear in court to-morrow
at noon.”</p>

<p class="c004">“In the action about my cow?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, against the manor.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I must be off betimes to-morrow; it is a long way.
Vitek, go this instant to Pete and get everything ready.
You are to go, too, as a witness.—Is Bartek notified?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I have brought all the summonses from the court bureau
to-day: there will be a lot of you together. And if the
manor is at fault, let it pay up.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Pay it must!—Such a cow as that!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Come with me into the other rooms,” the Voyt whispered;
“I have to talk with you.”</p>

<p class="c004">They went out, and remained so long that Yuzka had to
take supper in to them.</p>

<p class="c004">The Voyt, as he had more than once done already, entreated
him not to make enemies of the manor folk, to put
matters off, see how things would turn out, and beware of
joining with Klemba and his party. Boryna had hitherto
seemed to waver, calculating chances. He did not refuse to
listen, but did not care to join the Voyt’s side, still feeling
indignant at the slight offered him by the Squire, when he
had come to the miller’s lately.</p>

<p class="c004">Seeing that he made no impression, the Voyt tried alluring
him with a bait.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ye know that I, with the miller and the smith, have
come to an agreement with the manor: that we are to cart
the trunks to the sawmill and, when sawn into planks, to
the town.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, yes, of course I know: tongues wag about it quite
enough, and say you prevent folk from earning any money.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Much do I care! But let me tell you now what we three
have settled. Hearken to what I say.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_173">173</span>The old man shot a glance at him and listened attentively.</p>

<p class="c004">“We want you to be one of us. You shall cart the very
same quantity of timber. Ye have a good pair of draught-horses,
the wagoner will only have to drive, and the profit is
certain. Payment is by the cubic metre. You will have
earned fivescore roubles ere it be possible to work in the
fields.”</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna pondered long. “When do you begin work?” he
asked.</p>

<p class="c004">“From to-morrow. They are already cutting down timber
in the nearest clearings. The roads are fairly good, sledges
being still available. My man is to start off on Thursday.”</p>

<p class="c004">“A plague upon it! If I but knew whether my action will
succeed to-morrow!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Only join us, and all will be well.—I, the Voyt, have
spoken.”</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna remained plunged for a while in dubious musings;
he eyed the Voyt with attention, chalked something on the
bench, scratched his head, and said finally:</p>

<p class="c004">“I am with you in this undertaking.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Good. Come to the miller’s to-morrow, after the judgment,
and we shall talk the matter over further. I must be
off now, to get my sledge-runners tinkered up at the blacksmith’s.”</p>

<p class="c004">Away he went in high glee, assured that he had, by this
offer of partnership in cartage, bought the old man over to
his side.</p>

<p class="c004">Truly, though, the miller might make one with the manor:
his land was not on the village register, nor had he any
rights over the forest. So too might the Voyt, whose lands
had been taken from the clergy by the Russians; so might
the smith: but not he, not Boryna! He said: “Cartage is
one thing, and the forest dispute is another. Ere an agreement
is come to, or we have a complete rupture, many a day
must elapse. Why not, then, get my immediate profit out of
the partnership, and yet hold fast to our rights? There are,
in any case, some scores of roubles of clear gain. I should
<span class="pageno" id="Page_174">174</span>have to keep the servant and feed the horses, in any case.”</p>

<p class="c004">He smiled, rubbed his hands, and chuckled over the
situation.</p>

<p class="c004">“They have no more sense than so many sheep, thinking
to take me in like a silly calf. Silly themselves!”</p>

<p class="c004">In rare good humour, he went back to his womenfolk.
Yagna was out of the room. She had, they told him, gone
out to feed the swine.</p>

<p class="c004">He talked gaily, bantered Yasyek and Dominikova, awaiting
his wife the while with increasing uneasiness. She was
absent very long. Quietly and without a word, he went out
into the yard. The lads were in the barn, making ready the
sledge for the morrow’s ride. He looked into the stables, the
byre, the sties: Yagna was nowhere to be seen. For a time
he stood waiting under the eaves in the dark. It was a
sombre night with a cold howling gale, great dark clouds
chasing each other across the sky and, from time to time,
some white flakes falling.</p>

<p class="c004">Presently a dusky figure loomed in the path beyond the
stile. Dashing forward, Boryna leaped the stile, and whispered
fiercely:</p>

<p class="c004">“Where have you been, say?”</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna, though scared, carried it off boldly:</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Covering my feet.’ Would you pry into everything?”
she said with a mocking laugh, and went in.</p>

<p class="c004">He spoke no more about that; and when they went to
bed, he said in a quiet friendly tone, though without raising
his eyes:</p>

<p class="c004">“Would ye like to go to the Klembas’ to-morrow?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Surely, along with Yuzka.—Unless ye forbid.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I must go to the law-court, and leave my house to the
care of Providence. It were better ye should stay at home.”</p>

<p class="c004">“But will ye not be back by dusk?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I fear not. Perhaps only late in the night. It looks
like snow, and we may have hard work coming home. But
if ye will go, you may; I do not forbid you.”</p>
<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_175">175</span>
  <!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER IX</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">The snow had been, since early morning, threatening
to fall. The day rose, cloudy and very boisterous;
grains of snow came down, minute, like unsifted
groats; and the gale, gaining in strength as the morning advanced,
and constantly changing its direction, howled loud
and dismally.</p>

<p class="c004">The weather notwithstanding, Hanka had set out with her
father and several <i>Komorniki</i> immediately after noontide,
to get dry wood for fuel in the forest.</p>

<p class="c004">The gusts raged over the fields, shaking the trees, blowing
clouds of fallen snow into the air again, whistling and shrieking,
and casting them down once more, as when a linen cloth,
full of white hemp peel, is shaken out. Everything was lost
to sight in the raging turmoil.</p>

<p class="c004">Once clear of the village, they went forward in single file
along the pathways between the sown crops, towards the
pine-forest, now scarce visible through the falling snow.</p>

<p class="c004">The wind, increasing in intensity, smote upon them from
every quarter, dancing wildly round them, and buffeted and
struck them so violently that they could hardly stand. They
crawled along, bending down towards the ground; while it
rushed on, gathered up dry snow mingled with sand, and
returned to dash it in their faces.</p>

<p class="c004">Slowly they plodded onward, making half-audible sounds,
and rubbing their hands with snow; for the piercing frost
went through and through their thin garments; and the numerous
snow-drifts around the piles of stones or the trees
were continually blocking the way, and had to be turned,
thus lengthening their journey a good deal.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka walked foremost, often looking back at her father,
bowed down, and with his head in a shawl. He was dressed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_176">176</span>in a cast-off sheepskin of Antek’s, and girt with a band of
straw; and he dragged along at the tail, panting, forced every
now and then to stop, rest, and wipe his eyes, which were
watering with the blast. Then he would hasten on, crying:
“I am coming, Hanka, I am coming; fear not, I shall not
lag behind.”</p>

<p class="c004">Certainly he would have much preferred staying in the
chimney corner. But when she, poor thing! went out in
such weather, how could he remain at home? Besides, it
was unbearably cold in the hut; the children shivered and
shuddered all the time; they could not cook anything, and
ate only dry bread.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka, with set teeth, walked on in front of the <i>Komorniki</i>.—Yes,
it had come to that: Filipka, Krakalina, old
Kobusova, Magda, Kozlova, the very poorest in the whole
place, were now her companions.</p>

<p class="c004">She sighed to think of it: yet it was by no means the first
time she had been out thus with them.</p>

<p class="c004">“Let it be so! Let it be so!” she said in a hard whisper,
striving for strength and patience.</p>

<p class="c004">Since it had to be, well, she was willing; she would go and
seek for firewood along with those paupers, and never weep,
nor complain, nor beg anyone to help her.</p>

<p class="c004">And, indeed, to whom could she go? They might give
her something, but with it also a word of pity ... such pity
as might well wring the life-blood out of the heart!...
No: the Lord Jesus was trying her, had sent her a cross:
perhaps He would reward her ere long.... And, in any
case, she would bear all—never give way or let anyone pity
or mock her!</p>

<p class="c004">In these last times, she had suffered so much that every
part of her shook with agony, each crushing her with its
own particular pang.</p>

<p class="c004">It was not because of her poverty and the slights that
went with it, the hunger in her cabin, and the food, insufficient
even for the children; not because Antek drank his
earnings away in the tavern with those boon companions of
his, caring nothing for his family, and often (when he had
<span class="pageno" id="Page_177">177</span>crept home by stealth, like a vagabond dog) answering any
word of remonstrance with a blow. She could forgive all
that. “He was out of sorts, and his mood would pass, if
she did but wait patiently.”—But that he was unfaithful to
her, that she could not forget!</p>

<p class="c004">No, she could not! What, with a wife and children, yet
mindful of neither, and so utterly absorbed in <i>her</i>!</p>

<p class="c004">The thought tore at her heart like the red-hot pincers of
mediæval tortures.</p>

<p class="c004">“He loves Yagna, he dotes upon her: she is the cause of
all this!”</p>

<p class="c004">And the anguish of neglect and scorn and contumely; and
her shame, her jealousy, her craving for revenge—all these
monsters were incessantly tormenting her and plunging
their venomous fangs into her heart!</p>

<p class="c004">“Have mercy, O Lord! Spare me, O Jesus!” she would
groan in spirit, raising to Heaven those eyes of hers, red with
ever-falling tears.</p>

<p class="c004">She quickened her pace; the gale was so high upon the
hills not yet sheltered by the forest, that she felt intolerably
cold. The women with her, on the contrary, slackened their
steps and now lagged behind—blurs almost unseen in the
mist of swirling whiteness. The forest was near; and when
that mist cleared up for an instant, it suddenly appeared on
the snowy plain like a huge wall of trunks in serried array.</p>

<p class="c004">“Come on faster,” she called out impatiently; “we shall
rest when we get to the wood.”</p>

<p class="c004">But they were in no hurry, stopping frequently, and
crouching down on the snow, heads away from the wind, like
a covey of partridges, while they talked together.</p>

<p class="c004">To her call, Filipka answered in surly fashion:</p>

<p class="c004">“Hanka is like a dog speeding after a crow—thinks she
will get it if she hastes.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Poor thing!” murmured Krakalina, sympathetically;
“how she has come down in the world!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, well, she was warm enough at Boryna’s, and has
tasted good things: let her now taste things that are evil.
Some starve all the years of their lives, yet none pities them.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_178">178</span>“There was a time when she would not have bid us good
day.”</p>

<p class="c004">“My dear, there is a saying: ‘Wealth gives a wreath to
the brow; poverty, wings to the feet.’”</p>

<p class="c004">“Once I would have borrowed a mallet of her, and she
said it was for her own use alone.”</p>

<p class="c004">“True, open-handed she was not, and she thought not a
little of herself, as do all the Boryna folk; but I am sorry
for her, nevertheless.”</p>

<p class="c004">“To be just, that husband of hers is a scoundrel.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Were it any business of mine, I’d take Yagna to task on
the high road, rate her, curse her, and swinge her soundly.”</p>

<p class="c004">“That too may come to pass—worse still, peradventure.”</p>

<p class="c004">“The woman’s of the brood of Paches.... And her
mother was just the same in her youth.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Let us on: the wind is falling, and may go quite down
ere nightfall.”</p>

<p class="c004">Presently they all entered the forest, and separated, but so
as to be within call for the home-coming. And the gloomy
depths swallowed them up so entirely that they soon could
see hardly anything of one another.</p>

<p class="c004">It was a vast forest of old pine-trees, all standing close
to each other, straight and slender and strong; whose trunks,
overgrown with whitish-green lichens, looked like pillars of
verdigris-stained copper, peering forth amidst green verdure,
flecked with grey, in impenetrable ranks. Chilly mournful
sounds rose up from the snow underfoot; overhead, athwart
ragged pine-boughs, as through a broken thatch, the sky
was visible.</p>

<p class="c004">The wind blew above them; but at times all seemed as
still as in a church, when the organs suddenly cease to play,
and the chants are heard no more, and nothing is audible
save deep sighs, the shuffling of feet, the mumbling of prayers
in a faint dying hum: so the forest stood motionless, mute,
listening, as it were, to a far-away thundering—to the wild
cry of the ravaged fields which, rising up from some remote
spot, was heard only as a feeble moan.</p>

<p class="c004">By and by, however, the gale struck the forest with all its
<span class="pageno" id="Page_179">179</span>force—struck against its close-set trunks, assailing its depths,
shrieking in its dim nooks, and fighting an army of giants.—Only
to be defeated: its might gave way, collapsed, grew
weak, died in the compact undergrowth of brushwood. The
forest itself was unmoved; not a single branch waved, nor
did any trunk vibrate; within, the silence was deeper yet,
still more awful; only a bird or two was heard to flutter
about in the shadows.</p>

<p class="c004">But, now and again, there would come a squall of lightning
swiftness and power, like a hungry falcon swooping
down upon its prey: it took hold of the tree-tops and, with
an overwhelming shock, trampled and crushed and shattered
them in roaring frenzy. Then did the forest, as if roused
from slumber, wake up and shake itself and, shuddering
from one end to the other, rock its trees, swaying with a dull
but hurtling and ominous clangor; it rose again, stiffening
and straightening itself once more, uttering a terrible cry,
and struggling like a wrestler blind and mad with rage; and
the hubbub rent the air, and there was fighting within the
wood to its innermost depths. Every creature that lurked
and dwelt in the thick copses shrank back in dismay to its
lair; and, maddened with alarm, the fowls of the air flew
wildly about in the midst of the snow-showers and avalanches
of broken snapped-off boughs that fell from the tree-tops.</p>

<p class="c004">And, after this, there would follow long death-silences, in
which heavy thuds were heard afar off.</p>

<p class="c004">“They are felling the trees in Vilche Doly; how fast the
work goes on!” old Bylitsa murmured, as he gave ear to the
dull throbbing sounds.</p>

<p class="c004">“Hurry, hurry! we must return before night!”</p>

<p class="c004">They plunged into a clump of tall young saplings, where
brushwood and scrub had so intermingled their thickly
tangled branches that they scarce could force their way
through. A sepulchral stillness reigned around; no sound
reached there; even light hardly filtered through the thick
layer of snow which crusted the trees all over, hanging like a
roof overhead. This secluded nook was earthy-ashy grey,
very little snow having been wafted to the ground, which was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_180">180</span>strewn, knee-deep in places, with dry dead boughs; elsewhere
with great masses of green moss; with berry-shrubs,
yellow, faded, cowering close to the ground as in fear; and
with dried clusters of toadstools.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka went about actively, breaking off the biggest
branches she could find, cutting them all to the same length,
and then putting them into the open piece of canvas she
had brought; working with such ardour that she had to
take off her shawl, she felt so warm. In about an hour’s
time, she had gathered a bundle of faggots so large that she
could scarcely lift it. Her father, too, had made a pretty
large bundle himself, and tied it up with a cord, dragging
it along in search of a tree-stump, where he might with more
ease hoist it on to his shoulders.</p>

<p class="c004">They called out to the women; but the blast blew so
furiously through the vast forest that they could not make
them hear.</p>

<p class="c004">“Hanka, we must go back by the poplar-road: it will be
better than the cut through the fields.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Come, then. Keep your eyes upon me, and do not lag
too much behind.”</p>

<p class="c004">They at once struck off to the left, through a bit of old
oak-forest. But it was hard work getting on, the snow being
more than knee-deep here; and now and then came still
worse patches, where the leafless trees were scanty and there
hung down from the mighty outspread branches huge long
beards of caked snow: here and there, too, some slender
sapling, covered with a shaggy rusty fell of dead leaves,
would bend down, striking the earth in the whistling wind.</p>

<p class="c004">It was still blowing hard, with the air so full of snow that
there was no going any farther. Old Bylitsa’s strength at
once gave way, and he came to a standstill. Even Hanka
felt exhausted; but she only leaned with her bundle against
a tree, and sought for some better road.</p>

<p class="c004">“We shall never get through this way. Besides, there is a
marsh beyond the oak-forests. Let us go back through the
fields.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_181">181</span>They somehow made their way back to the great dense
pine wood, where it was somewhat less gusty, and the snow
less deep. Then they came out upon the fields. But here
they were met by such a driving blizzard that they could
not see a stone’s throw in front of them. The wind was
constantly blowing towards the forest, whence driven back
as from a wall, it rushed again into the fields, where, strong
as ever, it caught up whole hillocks of snow, lifted them
bodily into the air like great white clouds, which it again
hurled against the trees. How it rushed to and fro in the
forest! how it eddied! how fiercely it smote upon them both!
and how they all but failed to reach the sown fields! The
old man fell to the ground, and she had to help him on, little
as she herself was able to keep standing.</p>

<p class="c004">Back they went to the forest, where, cowering behind some
trees, they took counsel together how to come back; for they
could not tell in which direction to turn.</p>

<p class="c004">“Along the pathway to the left: then we shall be sure to
come out on the poplar-road, just by the cross.”</p>

<p class="c004">“But I do not see the path at all.”</p>

<p class="c004">He had to give detailed explanations, for she feared to go
the wrong way.</p>

<p class="c004">“And can ye tell which way to take?”</p>

<p class="c004">“To the left, so far as I can guess.”</p>

<p class="c004">They trudged along, skirting the wood and a little within
it, to be sheltered from the assaults of the gale.</p>

<p class="c004">“Come quickly, night is falling fast.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I will, I will, Hanka; let me but breathe awhile.”</p>

<p class="c004">But it was no easy matter to win through. The path was
not to be seen at all; and besides, a terrible wind assailed
them from one side, pouring down avalanches. They took
shelter behind trees, crouched under juniper-bushes: all in
vain. It pierced to the very marrow of their bones, especially
when they passed through some glen: the rustling of
the trees then would swell to shrieks, and the whole wood
sway and rock till the branches almost touched the ground,
lashing their faces at times; and now and then a young tree
<span class="pageno" id="Page_182">182</span>would fall with such a crash as one might think only a whole
uprooted forest could have made.</p>

<p class="c004">On they plodded as best they could, to reach the road soon
and be home before night: already the fields were turning
grey, and over the snowy wilds long dark streaks, like
wreaths of smoke, began to appear.</p>

<p class="c004">They got to the road at last and, half dead with weariness,
fell on their knees before the crucifix.</p>

<p class="c004">It stood at the edge of the forest, close to the highway,
sheltered by four huge birch-trees, with their white smocks
of bark and boughs which dangled like tresses. On a
cross of black wood hung a crucified Christ, made of sheet-iron,
and painted with lively glowing colours. The winds
had partly torn the figure away, for it was suspended by
one arm only, and battered the cross as it swung, creaking
rustily, as with an appeal for succour and rescue. The
weatherbeaten birches would conceal it, as they shook and
tossed to and fro; clouds of snow, too, drifted past, hiding
it under a white mist, through which occasional glimpses
of Christ’s livid body and bleeding face were seen, peering
forth from that pallid veil, and filling the heart of the beholder
with compassion.</p>

<p class="c004">On this old Bylitsa gazed with awe and crossed himself,
but he durst say nothing; for Hanka’s face, set, stern, hard,
incomprehensible, was like the night now coming on, with
blasts, and dim dark snow-tempests: ominously mysterious.</p>

<p class="c004">He thought that she saw nothing, heeded nothing. And
indeed she sat lost in dreary thought, always revolving that
one fact—that Antek had been unfaithful. Within her
there was a tempest of sighs as heart-rending as that body
of Christ crucified—of tears frozen to ice, yet still burning
her to death—of clamorous outcries which agony was wringing
from her young life!</p>

<p class="c004">“Shameless! Without any fear of Heaven!—Her son-in-law,
guilty of incest!—O God! O God!”</p>

<p class="c004">The horror of it swept over her as a hurricane. At first
dismayed, she presently seethed with angry resentful emotion—like
<span class="pageno" id="Page_183">183</span>the forest she had seen bowing to the blast, then
rising in fury to resist it.</p>

<p class="c004">“Let us go on ... and faster!” she cried. Lifting her
bundle on to her shoulders and bending forwards under it,
she went forth into the road, never looking back upon the
old man, but urged forward by unquenchable implacable
resentment.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, I will pay you for all this; yea, I will pay you in
full!” she said, wailing bitterly in spirit; and the bare
poplar-trees wailed along with her, as they did battle with
the storm.</p>

<p class="c004">“I have enough of this. If my heart were of stone, such
a blow would break it!... If Antek chooses, let him stay
abroad and take his ease in the tavern. But her I do not
forgive for the wrong she has done me: I will pay her ...
and in full! Yes, even though I rot in prison for it.—If
such were to walk God’s earth unpunished, then were there
no justice in the world!”... Such were her thoughts.
But after a while her fury burnt itself out, and grew as
pallid as the flowers seen when the window-panes are frosted
over. Her strength was now almost entirely spent, her burden
crushed her down; the hard knots on the pine-faggots
bruised her shoulders, and her back was aching sorely;
while her bundle, fixed with a stick across her neck, pulled
hard at her throat, choking her so that she trudged on ever
more heavily and slowly.</p>

<p class="c004">The road was all covered with driven snow, and open to
the blasts on every side. The poplars, scarcely visible a
few yards away, stood in an interminable row, bowing and
bending with fearful cries and shrieks as the wind lashed
them; struggling as birds in a snare, that scream and beat
their wings in vain convulsive outbursts.</p>

<p class="c004">On the uplands, the wind had somewhat abated; but
down below, its rage was yet greater than before. Down
the road it swept, and on either side, and over the plain,
and away in the grey blurred distance. The hurricane still
raged here, as in a cauldron: a thousand eddying gusts kept
<span class="pageno" id="Page_184">184</span>up a goblin dance; a thousand spheres of snow, wafted off
the plain, rolled along like enormous white whirling spindles;
thousands of snow-piles went moving over the ground;
thousands of ridges undulated forward, growing larger and
larger, higher and higher, as if they would reach the sky
and hide all things from sight—and then collapsed on a
sudden with a tumultuous uproar.</p>

<p class="c004">The whole country-side looked like a boiling pan, brimming
over with white liquid, bubbling and frothing and
foaming and steaming; while, with the night, there came
multitudinous voices, rising up from the ground, hissing loud
overhead, thunderous afar off: sounds like the swishing and
cracking of many whips—forest-music as the organ’s low
rumbling drone at the Elevation—wild long howls that
rent the air—cries as of birds, wandering and lost—horrible
noises as of unearthly weeping and sobbing; and then silence
again—and then the keen dry whistling of the wind in the
poplars, that tossed to and fro in the turbid snow-charged
air, like fearful phantoms, raising their arms to Heaven!</p>

<p class="c004">And Hanka dragged herself along, almost groping her
way from poplar to poplar, often stopping to rest, and listening
to those weird voices of the evening.</p>

<p class="c004">At the foot of one of those poplars, she saw a hare crouch,
dark against the snow. At her approach it fled into the
snowstorm, which seized it as with the talons of a bird of
prey; and it squealed pitifully in its clutch. Hanka cast a
glance of sorrowful compassion at the poor beast as it fled.—She
could hardly move now, and with great difficulty lifted
one foot after another through the snow. The burden
weighed her down inexorably; and she often fancied she
was bearing on her back the winter, the snow, the winds—everything,
in a word; that she had everlastingly been thus
walking on, with her sad, bleeding, weary soul, and would
continue thus till Doomsday. The road seemed to be
lengthening out endlessly, the weight she bore crushed her;
she stopped to rest ever more frequently, and with ever
longer halts, half insensible as she was. Her face was burning:
<span class="pageno" id="Page_185">185</span>she cooled it with snow, rubbed her eyes, braced herself
up as well as she could, and went forward to plunge
again into that shrieking, bellowing conflict of the elements.
But she wept abundantly; the tears gushed forth from her
heart, that deep hidden fountain of sorrow: from the very
bottom of her heart thus torn asunder, there came the desperate
outcry of a creature hopelessly lost. Yet from time
to time she would pray, uttering her prayers in a mournful
tone, and breathing them out in detached words and phrases.
So will a bird, freezing to death, now and again flap its
wings; and then, bereft of all strength, alight upon the
ground, hop forward a little, chirp a little, and settle down
once more in mortal drowsiness.</p>

<p class="c004">And so she again set to hurry on with her last remaining
strength, stumbling into snow-drifts, sometimes sticking fast
in them, but always going onwards, seized and scourged with
a sudden fear and alarm, as she thought of her children.</p>

<p class="c004">And now the wind brought her a tinkling sound, and the
noise of sledge-runners and men’s voices, but so brokenly
that, though she stopped to listen, she could not make out
one word. Someone, however, was certainly driving in her
direction; and at last she saw the horses’ heads distinctly
through the snow-mist.</p>

<p class="c004">“It is father-in-law!” she whispered; for she had made out
the white spot on the filly’s forehead. Then she waited no
longer, but turned round to go on.</p>

<p class="c004">She had not been mistaken. Boryna, along with Vitek
and Ambrose, was on his way back from the district court.
They drove slowly, it being difficult to get through the
drifts: in some places they had been forced to alight and lead
the horses. They seemed to have been drinking, for they
were talking and laughing aloud, Ambrose now and then
trolling out some snatches of songs.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka got out of their way, and drew her kerchief down
over her face, but could not prevent Boryna from recognizing
her at once as he drove past, whipping his horses up to
get along more quickly. They dashed on, but were stopped
<span class="pageno" id="Page_186">186</span>by another snow-drift. Then he looked round and pulled
up. When she was again visible and abreast of his sledge,
he called out to her:</p>

<p class="c004">“Throw your firewood in behind, and get up here: I’ll
take you home.”</p>

<p class="c004">She had been so accustomed to do his bidding that now
she did it instinctively.</p>

<p class="c004">“Bartek has given a lift to Bylitsa, who was sitting and
weeping under a tree; they are close behind us.”</p>

<p class="c004">She answered nothing, but looked round gloomily at the
raging chaos of night and snowstorm as she dropped into
the front seat, as yet only half conscious. Boryna eyed
her with careful scrutiny. She looked so wretched that now
she was a painful sight, with her livid frost-bitten face,
and eyes swollen with tears, and her mouth set in firm resolve.
Shivering with cold and weariness, she vainly tried
to wrap herself up in her tattered shawl.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ye ought to beware: in such a condition, an illness might
easily take you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And who will work in my stead?”</p>

<p class="c004">“What! go to the forest in such weather as this?”</p>

<p class="c004">“We had no more fuel at all, and could not cook our
meals.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Are your little ones well?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Little Peter was ill for a fortnight, but has quite recovered
now, and could eat twice as much as I give him,”
she answered, now at her ease and recovering from her state
of prostration. Throwing her shawl back, she looked him
calmly in the face, without any of the scared meekness of
former times. The old man guessed that a transformation
had taken place in her, and wondered at it greatly: she was
no longer at all the Hanka of old. A sort of glacial repose
was now to be felt in her, and her compressed lips told of
inflexible firmness and strength. He no longer frightened
her as of old; she spoke to him as to an equal and a stranger,
without either complaint or reproach; she answered simply
and to the point, in a voice which spoke of much suffering
<span class="pageno" id="Page_187">187</span>endured, with a certain hardness in her tone which the tempering
fire of hidden anguish had wrought; only the gleam
of her tearful azure eyes still betrayed an intensely emotional
soul.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ye have greatly changed.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Suffering shapes the soul as the smith shapes iron—and
sooner.”</p>

<p class="c004">Her reply amazed him so, he could find nothing to say to
it, and turned round to Ambrose to talk about the lawsuit
with the manor. In spite of the Voyt’s promise, he had
lost, and had to pay costs into the bargain.</p>

<p class="c004">“I shall,” he said confidently, “appeal and succeed.”</p>

<p class="c004">“That will be hard. The manor-folk have long arms, and
manage to succeed everywhere.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Against them too there’s a way—as there always is, if
one waits patiently for the right moment.”</p>

<p class="c004">“You are right, Matthias; but oh, how cold it is! Let’s
go to the tavern and warm ourselves.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Very well.—Having spent so much, I can spend a little
more.—But ye should know that only a blacksmith should
‘strike while the iron’s hot.’ The man who would overcome
must take happenings coolly, and possess his soul in
patience.”</p>

<p class="c004">By the time they had come to the village, the twilight had
deepened into thick darkness, and in the dusky air the houses
they passed by were indistinguishable; but the storm was
slowly subsiding.</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna stopped the horses at the path to Hanka’s cabin,
and got down to help her to get the bundle on her back;
when she had alighted, he said in her ear:</p>

<p class="c004">“Come round and see me—to-morrow, if you like. I
know you are badly off; that scoundrel drinks away all his
earnings, leaving you and the children to starve.”</p>

<p class="c004">“But ye drove us out; how can I dare return?”</p>

<p class="c004">“You speak foolishly.—I tell you, come!”</p>

<p class="c004">Choking with emotion, she kissed his hand, unable to utter
a word.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_188">188</span>“Will you come?” he asked, in a strangely kind and tender
voice.</p>

<p class="c004">“I will, and thankfully; since ye order me, I will come.”</p>

<p class="c004">He whipped the horses up, and at once turned off to the
tavern: while Hanka, not waiting for her father, who was
just alighting from Bartek’s sledge, hastened back to her
hut.</p>

<p class="c004">It was dark as pitch there, and seemed even colder than
out of doors. The children slept curled up in the feather-bed.
She set busily about to make the fire and prepare
supper, but was all the while full of her extraordinary meeting
with Boryna.</p>

<p class="c004">“No! Were he on his death-bed, I must not go: Antek
would make me pay too dear!” she cried out angrily. But
other thoughts succeeded presently, some of revolt against
her husband.</p>

<p class="c004">Had anyone in the world made her suffer so much as he?</p>

<p class="c004">True, Boryna had made over land to that swinish woman,
and had driven them away. But Antek had fought with
him first, and had been continually snarling at him, so that
the old man lost patience. So long as he lived, he had the
right to do with his own land as he pleased.—And how
tenderly he had asked her to come just now! ... and inquired
about the children, and everything!—Yes, and never,
had not Antek gone after that woman, would there have been
half this misery and humiliation.... That at least was
not in any wise the old man’s fault.</p>

<p class="c004">And as she went on musing, her resentment against
Boryna began to abate.</p>

<p class="c004">In then came Bylitsa, half frozen and terribly exhausted.
He had to warm himself by the fire for an hour at least, before
he could say how he had been unable to go any farther,
and possibly might have been frozen to death under
that tree but for Boryna.</p>

<p class="c004">“He saw me, and would have put me on his sledge; but
when I said you were on the road ahead, he left me to
Bartek, and drove on to catch up with you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Was it so? He never told me that.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_189">189</span>“He is not a hard man really, but would have folk think
he is.”</p>

<p class="c004">After supper, when the children had eaten as much as
they could, and were tucked up in bed again and asleep,
Hanka sat down by the fireside to spin what remained of
the organist’s wool; and her father still continued warming
himself, looking timidly at her, clearing his throat, and
gathering courage to speak; which he did at last, though
with great hesitation.</p>

<p class="c004">“Prithee make it up with him. Think, not of Antek, but
of yourself and the children.”</p>

<p class="c004">“That is easy to say.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Boryna himself made the first advances.... And see:
his home is now become a hell.... He will surely thrust
Yagna away from him; if not at once, he will very shortly....
Yuzka can never manage so large an establishment.—If,
when that comes to pass, you have found favour in his
eyes, it were well.... You can render him many a service,
and in good season ... we know not what may happen
... he may ask you to return....”</p>

<p class="c004">As he spoke, she let the spindle go and, with her head
propped on the top of her distaff, began to think this over
and reflect upon her father’s advice.</p>

<p class="c004">He was now preparing to go to bed, but asked her, in a
confidential tone:</p>

<p class="c004">“Did he talk to you by the way?”</p>

<p class="c004">She told him all.</p>

<p class="c004">“Pray go to him, my daughter; go to-morrow morning;
go, run to him, since he calls for you. Think but of yourself
and of the children.... Be on the old man’s side, and
kind to him. Be like the docile calf, which, folk say,
‘thrives, sucks much milk, and waxes stout.’—Remember that
‘spite never yet brought success to any man.’—As to Antek,
he will return to you. He is now possessed of a devil, and
driven to and fro by him; but this will leave him soon, and
he will come back to you. Our Lord is watching to deliver
you from all these woes in His own good time.”</p>

<p class="c004">He spent much time exhorting and trying to convince
<span class="pageno" id="Page_190">190</span>her; but she made no reply. Disappointed, he said no more,
but went to bed and lay silent. Hanka went on spinning
and pondering his words.</p>

<p class="c004">From time to time she rose to see whether Antek was coming.
Nothing was to be heard.</p>

<p class="c004">She worked, but did not get on well. The thread would
break, or the spindle slip from her hand, because she was
turning Boryna’s words over in her mind.</p>

<p class="c004">Peradventure it might prove true: the hour might strike
when he would call her back again!</p>

<p class="c004">And by slow, slow degrees there grew up in her mind the
desire—feeble at first, at last invincible—for peace and
reconciliation with Boryna.</p>

<p class="c004">“We three are destitute: there will be a fourth presently
... and what shall I do then?”</p>

<p class="c004">She no longer took Antek into account, but considered
herself and children, and felt she must decide for them all—must
and would.</p>

<p class="c004">If she could but once more get back that position of
housewife at Boryna’s and feel ground again, she thought,
she would take up her duties so thoroughly and earnestly
that nothing should ever prevent their perfect fulfilment,
and hope grew within her heart, and waxed so great, and
filled her with such strength and energy and courage, that her
eyes flashed at the thought, and she felt all on fire.</p>

<p class="c004">For a long space she enjoyed this waking dream of hers—perhaps
till midnight—and made up her mind to go to
Boryna the next day, and take the children along with her,
though Antek might forbid, and even beat her. She would
not obey him, but take the opportunity offered and go: she
was now aware of unconquerable power in herself, and
felt ready to fight the whole world, if she must.</p>

<p class="c004">Once more she looked out of doors. The wind had quite
gone down; in the black night, the snow appeared dark
grey. Huge clouds passed in the sky, like rolling waters;
and out of the far-off woods, and from the invisible shadows,
there came a feeble murmur.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_191">191</span>Having put the light out and said her prayers, she began
to undress.</p>

<p class="c004">Suddenly a distant stifled noise rose out of the silence
around her, quivering,—grew stronger and stronger, and at
the same time a ruddy glow shone athwart the panes.</p>

<p class="c004">She ran out in terror.</p>

<p class="c004">Somewhere in the midst of the village, a conflagration
had broken out: a column of flame rose up, with smoke and
a swarm of sparks.</p>

<p class="c004">The alarm-bell sounded presently, and the cries rang
louder.</p>

<p class="c004">“Up! Up! There’s a fire!” she screamed to Staho in the
other lodgings, dressed in a hurry, and rushed forth into the
road, where she was met by Antek, running from the village.</p>

<p class="c004">“Where’s the fire?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Can’t tell.—Go in!”</p>

<p class="c004">“It may be at Father’s ... ’tis somewhere very nigh!”
she stammered, mortally afraid.</p>

<p class="c004">“Blood of a dog! get in!” he bellowed, thrusting her into
the hut by main force.</p>

<p class="c004">He was covered with blood, bareheaded; his sheepskin
was rent in two, his face blackened and grimy, and his eyes
glowed like a madman’s.</p>
<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_192">192</span>
  <!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER X</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">On that same day, when work was over and the evening
well on towards night, they began to drop in
at Klemba’s for the grand spinning-party.</p>

<p class="c004">Dame Klemba had invited elderly women, for the most
part, kinswomen or good friends of hers, and they had all
come in proper time, as careful not to be late as not to disregard
the invitation.</p>

<p class="c004">First of all, according to her custom, came Vachnikova,
plentifully supplied with wool, and carrying several spindles
under her arm. Then Golab, Matthew’s mother, with a
vinegar-face, always bound up, who always complained of
everything; after her, Valentova the talkative—a huffy
woman who cackled like a hen; and Sikora’s wife, a terrible
gossip, thin as a broomstick, and much interested in all her
neighbours’ quarrels. And then rolled in Ploshka’s wife,
tubby, red-faced, plethoric, always over-dressed, high and
mighty to everybody, and gifted with rare powers of speech,
which made her generally disliked. Afterwards there
quietly slipped in Balcerkova, skinny, undersized, withered,
and sly; an ill-tempered woman, and such a lawsuit-maker
that she was on fighting terms with half the village, and
went to the law-courts every month. And now boldly
stepped in (uninvited, indeed) the woman Kobus, Voytek’s
wife, so malicious a gossip and so rank a shrew that folk
shunned her friendship as they would fire. Also came,
breathing heavily and in a hurry, Gregory’s wry-mouthed
wife, a drunkard, a cheat, and given to practical jokes—especially
such as did harm to her neighbours. Then old
Sohova (Klemba’s son-in-law’s mother), a very quiet
woman, most religious, and (Dominikova excepted) the one
who spent most time in church. There were others also, too
<span class="pageno" id="Page_193">193</span>hard to describe, being as like one another as geese in a
flock, and indiscernible, save by their attire. All these came—an
assembly of matrons, each bringing with her something
or other: wool or flax to spin, or hurds; some with linen to
sew, or feathers to make up for bedding—not willing to be
seen empty-handed, as if they had only come to talk.</p>

<p class="c004">They formed a large circle in the centre of the room,
under a lamp that hung from the ceiling; and they looked
like a clump of bushes, well-grown, mature, and blighted
by late autumn; for all were elderly, and all about the same
age.</p>

<p class="c004">Klembova welcomed them all with the same friendly greeting,
but spoke low; she was short of breath, her lungs being
in a bad state. Klemba, as a good sensible man, who loved to
be on pleasant friendly terms with everybody, said some kind
words to each, and set the tables and benches for them
himself.</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna arrived somewhat later, with Yuzka and Nastka,
and a few other girls, together with a sprinkling of young
men who dropped in subsequently.</p>

<p class="c004">It was a big gathering. The winter was a hard one, and
the days irksome to pass. People cared little to go to bed
as fowls to roost; that would give them overmuch time to
lie in bed till daybreak, and make their sides ache with
weariness.</p>

<p class="c004">They seated themselves, some on benches, others on chests.
Klemba’s sons, too, brought in tree-stumps from the yard
for the boys to sit down upon, and there was room enough
for all. The hut, though of no height, was very large, built
in the old style, most likely by Klemba’s great-great-grandfather,
and a hundred and fifty years old or more.
It was already tottering with age, leaning slantwise like a
stooping old man; in places, the thatched eaves almost
touched the hedge beneath, and had to be propped up.</p>

<p class="c004">After a time, the talk grew louder and more general, while
the spindles twirled and whirled and hummed on the floor,
and a spinning-wheel buzzed here and there.</p>

<p class="c004">Klemba’s sons were four: tall slender striplings, with budding
<span class="pageno" id="Page_194">194</span>moustaches. They sat close to the door, engaged in
twisting ropes of straw. The other young fellows were sitting
in corners, smoking cigarettes, grinning and joking with
the lasses, and making them giggle till the room rang again.</p>

<p class="c004">At last Roch, whom they had long expected, came in,
followed by Matthew.</p>

<p class="c004">“Is it windy still?” someone asked.</p>

<p class="c004">“No wind at all; the weather will change.”</p>

<p class="c004">“It surely is going to thaw,” Klemba added; “we hear
the forest moaning.”</p>

<p class="c004">Roch, who now taught a class at the Klembas’, and
lodged and boarded there, sat down to eat at a separate
table. Matthew greeted some of the company, but did not
so much as glance at Yagna, whom he made out he had not
seen, although she was straight in front of him. At that
she smiled faintly, with her eyes fixed on the entrance door.</p>

<p class="c004">“Well, it has been blowing all day long, Heaven preserve
us!” Sohova said. “Some women have crept back from the
forest, half dead; and they say Hanka and her father, who
were among them, are missing.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, yes,” Kobusova grunted. “‘Wherever the poor man
goes, the wind against him blows.’”</p>

<p class="c004">“Alas! Hanka has come down indeed....” Ploshkova
was beginning to say, but stopped and talked of something
else on seeing how red Yagna had turned.</p>

<p class="c004">“Has not Yagustynka been here?” Roch inquired.</p>

<p class="c004">“She is not wanted: our company takes no pleasure in
slandering and backbiting.”</p>

<p class="c004">“A wicked hag she is! This very day she set the Voyt
and the Soltys’ wives so by the ears that they fell to railing
and would have fought, had not the company prevented
them.”</p>

<p class="c004">“That’s because they let her talk as she pleases.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And there’s no one to pay her out for her spiteful words
and mischief-making.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yet all know what she is: why listen to her snarls?”</p>

<p class="c004">“True: we never know when she is lying and when not.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_195">195</span>“They let her, because they all enjoy hearing her talk
against someone else,” Ploshka’s wife concluded.</p>

<p class="c004">Teresa, a soldier’s wife, here called out: “Let her say
one word against me! She would pay it dear!”</p>

<p class="c004">Whereupon Balcerek’s wife said to her, sarcastically:</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, is she not telling tales against you in the village
all day long?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Repeat—repeat them, whatsoever ye have heard!” she
shouted, flushing crimson: it was a matter of general knowledge
that she was on exceedingly intimate terms with Matthew.</p>

<p class="c004">“I will, and to your face, when your goodman is back
from the army.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Beware what ye say of me! What, will ye babble and
gabble here?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Wherefore scream, when none accuses you!” Ploshka’s
wife cried out in rebuke; but Teresa was not soon appeased,
and she muttered to herself for a good while.</p>

<p class="c004">“Have they been here, with the ‘bear?’” Roch asked, to
change the subject.</p>

<p class="c004">“They are at the organist’s now, and will be here at
once.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Who are the performers?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, the sons of Gulbas and Filipka; who but they, the
rogues!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Here they come!” the lasses cried. In front of the
cabin, a long-drawn roar resounded; then various animals’
cries: cocks crowing, sheep bleating, horses whinnying: all
this to the accompaniment of a fife. Finally, the door
opened, and a young fellow came in, clad in a sheepskin
coat, turned inside out, and a tall fur cap, with his face so
blackened, he looked like a gipsy. He came pulling the
“bear” in question after him by a rope, covered all over
with shaggy brown pea-straw, save for a head of fur with
paper ears that he could shake at will, and a tongue that
hung out for more than a foot. To his arms were fastened
staves with pea-straw twisted round them, so that he seemed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_196">196</span>to go on all fours. After him went the other bear-leader,
wielding a straw lash in one hand, and in the other a club
that bristled all over with sharp pegs, to which bits of fat
bacon, loaves and bulky packets were stuck. In the rear
walked Michael, the organist’s boy, playing the fife, and a
number of youngsters with sticks, tapping on the floor and
shouting vociferously.</p>

<p class="c004">The bear-leader “praised God,” crowed, bleated, neighed
like a rampant stallion, and, lifting up his voice, spoke
thus:</p>

<p class="c004">“We, bear-leaders, come from a foreign clime, beyond the
ocean and the endless forests, where men walk upside down,
use sausages for palings, and fire to cool themselves; where
pots are set to boil in the sun, and where the sky rains
vodka: thence have we brought this savage bear! It has
been told us that there are in this village wealthy husbandmen,
good-natured housewives—and fair maidens too. And
therefore from that foreign clime have we come, beyond the
Danube, to obtain kind treatment, have our needs supplied,
and something given us for our pains!—Amen.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Show, then, what ye can do,” said Klemba; “peradventure
there may be something for you in the larder.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Instantly.—Ho, play the fife there; and you, bear,
dance!” the bear-leader cried. Then the fife poured forth
one of its sweetest tunes, and the lads tapped the floor with
their sticks, and shouted loudly in cadence, while the leader
mimicked the voices of many a beast, and the “bear”
jumped about as on all fours, twitching his ears, putting
his tongue out and in again, and running after the girls.
The bear-leader seemed to be pulling him back, and struck
with his lash at everyone within his reach, crying:</p>

<p class="c004">“Have found no husband yet, lass?—A rope’s end you
shall get, lass!”</p>

<p class="c004">The noise in the room, with the racket and scampering and
squealing, waxed louder and louder; and the merriment grew
to its height, when the bear began to frolic wildly, rolling on
the floor, roaring, leaping for fun, and catching at the girls
with his long wooden arms, making them dance to the tunes
<span class="pageno" id="Page_197">197</span>played on Michael’s fife: the two bear-leaders, meanwhile,
and the lads who accompanied them, making such an uproar
that the old cabin might well have fallen to pieces with
the horse-play and the din and fun of it.</p>

<p class="c004">Then, Klemba’s wife having treated them very bountifully,
they left the place; but far along the road came the
sound of shouting men and barking dogs.</p>

<p class="c004">“Who played the bear?” Sohova asked, when they had
quieted down.</p>

<p class="c004">“Could ye not find out? Why, Yasyek Topsy-turvy.”</p>

<p class="c004">“How could I know him, with that shaggy head of fur?”</p>

<p class="c004">“My dear,” Kobusova observed, “for such games as that,
the doodle has quite enough sense.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yasyek is not such a fool as ye make him out to be!”
said Nastka, taking his part. No one contradicted her; but
sly significant smiles flickered on many faces. They again
sat down and began chattering merrily. The girls, headed
by Yuzka, who was the least shy of them all, crowded round
the fire-place where Roch sat, coaxing and teasing him to
tell them some such story as he had told at Boryna’s in
the autumn.</p>

<p class="c004">“Well, Yuzka, do you remember the tale I told you then?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Certainly: ’twas about the Lord Jesus and His dog
Burek.”</p>

<p class="c004">“If ye care, I will tell this evening about our kings of
old.”</p>

<p class="c004">They placed a stool for him beneath the lamp, made a
circle round him, and he sat in their midst like an old
hoary oak in a clearing, compassed about with a clump of
many bushes. He spoke deliberately and in a quiet voice.</p>

<p class="c004">A hush fell upon them all; only the spindles hummed
on, and the logs crackled now and again upon the hearth.
And Roch told them many a marvellous tale: of the kings
and the bloody wars of old; of the mountains amidst which
there now sleeps an army of enchanted warriors, awaiting
but the sound of the trumpet to start up and fall on the foe
and purge the land of evil; of the great castles, in whose
golden chambers white-clad enchanted princesses, expecting
<span class="pageno" id="Page_198">198</span>their deliverer, mourn in the moonlit nights; and of
those where music is heard nightly in the empty rooms, and
multitudes assemble there to dance, who at cock-crow vanish
and go back to their tombs. They listened; the spindles
no longer twisted under their fingers; their minds went forth
into that world of marvels, and their eyes flashed, and tears
of ineffable rapture welled up, their hearts well-nigh bursting
their bosoms with longing and amazement.</p>

<p class="c004">Roch wound up by telling them of a king nicknamed by
his nobles the “Peasant King,” because he was humane,
just and good to all folk alike; of his terrible wars, and of
his wanderings in the disguise of a peasant, when he went
about the land and lived with his people as a brother, so
that he knew of the evil things done, and could redress
the wrongs; and how, after that, that he might be yet more
at one with the peasants, he married a husbandman’s
daughter, Sophia by name, who dwelt nigh Cracow; and,
taking her to the castle in that city, he reigned there for
many years, the father of his people, and the best husbandman
in the country.</p>

<p class="c004">To all this they listened with rapt attention, not missing
one word, and even holding their breath for fear of interrupting
the stream of wonders told them. As to Yagna, she
was now quite unable to spin any more; her hands had
fallen to her sides, and with head bowed and one cheek
pressed on the top of her distaff, she fixed her turquoise-blue
eyes on Roch’s face. He seemed to her like a saint, come out
of a picture-frame; so holy he looked, with his grey hair, his
long white beard, and those pale eyes of his that seemed
to be gazing at something far away. She listened with all
her might—the might of an exceedingly impressionable
heart—so earnestly taking in all he said, that emotion hardly
suffered her to breathe. His words brought everything
plainly before her mind’s eye; and where he led, she too
followed in spirit.—What struck her most of all was his
tale about the king and his peasant queen; oh, how beautiful
she thought it!</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_199">199</span>“And did the king himself live so—together with the
peasants?” Klemba asked, after a long silence.</p>

<p class="c004">“He did.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Lord!” whispered Nastka; “if a king spoke to me, I
should die of fear!”</p>

<p class="c004">“And I would follow him all over the world to get one
word from him ... one word!” Yagna cried, passionately.</p>

<p class="c004">They then put many a question to Roch. Where could
those castles be found? and that army? and those great
riches and beautiful things? and those kings, so mighty?—where?</p>

<p class="c004">He answered, somewhat sadly, but with wisdom, pointing
out to them so many a deep truth and holy maxim that
they all sighed, and fell to reflecting on the ways of God’s
providence in this world.</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes,” said Klemba, “to-day is ours; to-morrow belongs
to the Lord!”</p>

<p class="c004">But Roch was tired, and needed some rest. As all were
highly interested in the wonderful tales told, each began,
at first in whispers, and then aloud, to tell of such things
as they too had heard.</p>

<p class="c004">One told one tale, another a second, and this reminded a
third of something else, each bringing in a fresh point
of interest. So the tales glided on like spun threads, and
softly as the moonbeams that light up the dead dark waters
in the secret woodlands.—They told how a drowned woman
came back to suckle her hungry babe, whose cries had
drawn her; and how an aspen stake must be thrust through
the heart of a vampire in its coffin, that it may not come
out to suck human blood any more; how there are noonday
phantoms that lurk in lanes between fields, to strangle children.
They spoke of talking trees, of horrible midnight
spectres, of hanged men, of witches, of bound souls, doing
penance upon earth—and of many another weird and awful
thing that made the hair to stand on end, the heart to
faint with horror, and all that heard to shudder, frozen
with dread. Then they sat mute, looking apprehensively
<span class="pageno" id="Page_200">200</span>one at the other, and lending an ear: they fancied someone
was walking about the loft over the ceiling, or lurked
hid outside the windows; that glaring eyes glowed upon
them through the panes, or dim shadowy forms skulked in
nooks and corners; and more than one made the sign of
the cross, and said prayers with chattering teeth. But this
mood was swift to pass away, like a cloud, when it has glided
over the sun and one has forgotten that it ever was there.
And they then set once more to chatter and spin long,
long yarns, which Roch heard attentively, till at last he
joined their talk, and related a certain fable about a horse.</p>

<p class="c004">“Once upon a time, a poor five-acre husbandman possessed
a horse, whose nature was slothful and evil beyond
words. He was good to it, but that was of no use; he fed it
well, but it never was pleased. And it would do no work at
all, but pulled its harness to pieces, and lashed out so
viciously that no one could go near it.... At last its master,
seeing that kindness was of no avail, grew mightily
angry and, harnessing the horse to a plough, set it to
till a field that had long lain fallow, thinking to wear it out
thereby, and weary it into obedience. It refused to draw;
then he gave it so sound a flogging as made it submit and
work. But it thought it had been grievously ill-used, and
the memory rankled, with craving to be revenged at a convenient
season. And when the husbandman one day had
stooped down to set its hind legs free, crash! the horse’s
hoofs struck out and killed him on the spot; and it set
off to roam the world at liberty.</p>

<p class="c004">“Throughout the summer, things went fairly well with
him. He lay in the shade, or ate the corn on strangers’
lands. But winter came round, the snow fell, there was
little to eat, and he was pinched with cold. Therefore he
went farther and farther away to get food. He had to
run day and night, the wolves following him close and often
biting his flanks very deep.</p>

<p class="c004">“Away he ran, and ran, and ran, even to the confines of
the winter—to a meadow where the weather was warm, the
grass knee-deep and over, and streamlets sparkled in the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_201">201</span>sun, with cool shadows moving to and fro upon their banks,
and a pleasant breeze blowing over them. He went to eat
that grass, for he was famishing: but, whenever he thought
to get a mouthful, it was only a mouthful of hard stones
he got: the grass had disappeared. Then he would fain
taste some water: it was there no more, but only stinking
mire in its stead! He sought the shade to lie down: it
floated away, and he was burned and baked by the sun.—Then
he would have returned to the forests: they too had
vanished! The poor horse neighed in distress, and other
horses answered him; and, following the sound, he at last
got beyond the meadow and came to a great farm-house.
All of silver it seemed to be, its panes as of precious jewels,
its thatch like the star-studded sky; and several folk were
there, going to and fro. He crawled after them, for now he
was willing to labour, no matter how hard, rather than
die miserably of hunger. But he lingered on all day in the
heat, and no one came to put a halter on him. At evening,
however, someone came out: it was the farmer. Now He
was the Lord Jesus, the Great Husbandman, the Holiest! and
He said:</p>

<p class="c004">“‘You lazy one, you that have slain a man, you have
naught to do here. Not till they that curse you now shall
bless you, will I admit you into My stable.’</p>

<p class="c004">“‘I did but strike him back, because he beat me.’</p>

<p class="c004">“‘For that beating he has answered to Me; but I hold all
justice in My hands.’</p>

<p class="c004">“‘I am so starved!’ the horse whinnied, ‘so thirsty! so
tormented with pain!’</p>

<p class="c004">“‘I have spoken. Away! and I will command the wolves
to harry and pursue you.’</p>

<p class="c004">“So back went the horse to the land of winter, and dragged
himself along in hunger and cold and exceeding great fear;
for the wolves—the hounds of the Lord, as it were—hunted
him on continually, and scared him with their howls. At
last, one spring night, he stood before the gate of his master’s
dwelling-house, where he neighed, expecting to be received.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_202">202</span>“But at that sound the widow and her children rushed
out, and, snatching up sticks, staves and cudgels, they beat
him cursing him the while for his evil deed, whereby they
had come to great misery and destitution.</p>

<p class="c004">“Then went he back to the woods, knowing not what else
to do. The wild beasts came up against him, and he did
not defend himself, for he now thought death as good as
life. Howbeit, they only touched his sides, and the chief
amongst them said:</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Lo, you are too thin—naught but skin on your bones!
Eat you we will not, nor wear out our teeth to no purpose:
but we shall take pity on you, and help you.’</p>

<p class="c004">“They took him with them, and the next morning led
him to his master’s fields, and put him to the plough that
was standing there.</p>

<p class="c004">“‘They will plough with you, and make you wax stout;
and in the autumn we shall come and unharness you!’ So
they spake.</p>

<p class="c004">“The widow came to the field later; but though she cried,
‘A miracle!’ seeing him back and about to plough, the bitter
memory of what he had done soon made her revile him
and beat him as hard as she could. And this she did the
next day, and after, continually punishing him for his crime.
All the summer he toiled hard and in patience, knowing
that he suffered justly. Only after several years, when the
widow had taken another husband, and also purchased
some more land from a neighbour, did she relent towards
the horse, saying unto him:</p>

<p class="c004">“‘You did us a grievous wrong; but since by your
means the Lord has blessed us with good harvests, and I
have got an able husband, and have bought some fields, I
fully and freely forgive you.’</p>

<p class="c004">“And behold, in that same night, while they were celebrating
a christening-feast, the wolves, messengers of our
Lord, came, took that horse out of the stable, and led him
to the fields of Paradise.”</p>

<p class="c004">They wondered exceedingly at the narrative, and were
greatly exercised, thinking how the Lord always punishes
<span class="pageno" id="Page_203">203</span>evil and rewards good deeds, and watches carefully over all
things, as this tale about the horse clearly showed.</p>

<p class="c004">“Not even the worm that bores in this wall is hidden
from His eyes.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Nor even,” Roch swiftly added, “is any most secret
thought concealed from Him, nor any foul desire.”</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna started at the words; for Antek had just come in,
though noticed by few. Valentova was at the time relating
such wonders about an enchanted princess, that the
spindles ceased from turning, and all sat motionless, listening
in charmed silence.</p>

<p class="c004">And thus they spent that bleak February evening.</p>

<p class="c004">All their minds were on fire, and blazed like roaring
resinous faggots; murmurs of emotional outbursts—fancies,
dreams, desires—fluttered about the cabin like butterflies—living,
flying flowers.</p>

<p class="c004">They wove themselves such a web of marvels—so bright
with changing prismatic hues—that for the moment it quite
shut out the sad, grey, miserable world they lived in.</p>

<p class="c004">They went a-roaming over dark plains, lit up with phantom
lights; by silver streams, where eerie songs and mysterious
calls and gurgling ripples resounded; through vast
woods, full of glamour—of knights, of giants, of castles
haunted by spectres, of dragons breathing flames. They
stood horror-struck at those crossways where vampires
screech with laughter; where they that have hanged themselves
utter the sobs of the lost; and where the souls of unchristened
children flit and hover on bats’ wings. They
wandered through dim burying-places, following the shades
of such as do penance for self-murder; they listened to uncanny
voices in ruins of castles and churches; saw fearful
visions of terror pass by in endless procession; were present
at battles fought; and looked beneath the waters, where
the swallows sleep together in long festoons, to be waked each
springtime at the Blessed Virgin’s call, who gives them to
the world again!</p>

<p class="c004">Heaven and hell they passed through—through the dark
shadows of the wrath of God, and through the radiance of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_204">204</span>His tender mercy; through ineffable regions and times of
raptures, marvels, miracles; through worlds never seen but
in hours of ecstasy, or in dreams—when man looks and
gazes, is dizzy and spellbound, and knows not whether he
is still in this world or in the next!</p>

<p class="c004">It was then that, like an ocean before them, there arose
an impassable barrier—a barrier of enchantments and bright
wonders—between them and the real world, making it fade
away, with the cabin, and the thick black night—this
world of troubles, miseries, wrongs, tears, unfulfilled desires—and
opening their eyes to that other world, far more
majestic and beautiful than tongue can tell!</p>

<p class="c004">They had entered the world of the Fabulous; the life of
the Fabulous surrounded them with its rainbow tints; the
fables of Dreamland had become realities for them. They
were dying with a rapture in which they yet found a new
life—the great new life, abounding and sacred, merged and
plunged in the Miraculous: wherein all trees speak, all stones
are animated, all woods enchanted, and every sod of ground
instinct with unknown force: wherein all things great and
invisible and superhuman live their life—the sublime life
of the Inconceivable.</p>

<p class="c004">With uttermost longing and a yearning of ecstasy did
they aspire towards that life, uniting all things with its infrangible
chain—fancy and reality, prodigy and wishes—in
a bewildering procession of dream-existences, for which,
under the miserable conditions of their earthly days, their
weary crippled souls were insatiably pining.</p>

<p class="c004">And indeed, what was that life of theirs, so dull, so
squalid? what was that daily round of deeds, so like the
glances of a sick man, veiled in the mists of suffering?—Mere
darkness—a sad tedious night, during which, except at
the hour of death, no such marvels were ever to be seen with
the bodily eyes.</p>

<p class="c004">As a beast of burden beneath the yoke, so livest thou, O
man! caring only to get through this thy present day, and
never thinking of what surrounds thee—what incense-perfumes—and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_205">205</span>from what most sacred altars—fill the
world—nor what hidden prodigies are lurking everywhere!</p>

<p class="c004">O man! thou seest no more than doth a rock beneath
deep waters! O man! who in darkness ploughest the field
of life, thou sowest it but with tears and trouble and
sorrow!</p>

<p class="c004">And this thy starlike soul, O man! thou lettest it wallow
in the marsh and the quagmire!...</p>

<p class="c004">The conversation went on, and Roch willingly joined in
it, always full of wonder and sorrow and tears, when others
wondered and sorrowed and wept....</p>

<p class="c004">From time to time, there would be long pauses, in which
you might almost hear the throbbing of hearts ready to
burst, and you could see how their moist eyes glistened,
shining with dewy tears; while exclamations of wonder and
longing arose, and their souls knelt down before the Lord,
in this His temple of marvels, and sang the great hymn of
thanksgiving. This all their hearts were singing, filled with
ecstasy, trembling, in the mystic communion of the Ideal;
like the earth, when it thrills in spring beneath the sunbeams;
like the waters at evening, when the day is calm
and quiet, and vibrations and iridescent tints play all over
them; or like the young corn in an afternoon of early May,
murmuring continuously and gently waving delicate blades
and feathery ears in a prayer of thanks.</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna was in heaven. So deeply did she feel and realize
all these things that they stood before her in concrete form
and shape, and she was able to cut them out in paper without
any difficulty. They handed her some sheets, written
over by the children whom Roch was teaching; and while
she listened to the legends and stories, she snipped out, now
spectres, now kings, or vampires, or dragons, or any other
wonderful things, so well cut that they were recognized without
fail. So many did she cut out that a whole beam might
have been pasted over with her handiwork; and she painted
them all with raddle that Antek passed to her. So absorbed
was she in her work and the legends she was listening to, that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_206">206</span>she failed to notice him, as he stood there impatient, trying
to draw her attention; nor did the others, who were also
deeply interested, remark the signs he made.</p>

<p class="c004">On a sudden, the dogs outside fell to barking furiously,
and howling as if in dread, till one of Klemba’s sons went
out to them. He said on his return that he had seen a
peasant outside the window, who had run away.</p>

<p class="c004">No one either paid heed to what he had said or remarked
that later, when the dogs had ceased barking, a face passed
swiftly outside the window, and vanished. Only one girl
saw it, and screamed out, rolling her eyes in terror.</p>

<p class="c004">“Someone has just gone by—there—there—in the yard!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, I hear feet scrunching through the snow!”</p>

<p class="c004">“And there’s a scraping noise along the wall!”</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Talk of the wolf ... it is sure to appear!’”</p>

<p class="c004">A panic came over them, and now they sat terror-struck,
motionless with dread.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah!” someone said in a terrified whisper, “we were speaking
of the Evil One—and perhaps we have called him up—and
he may even now be on the watch for one of us!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Jesu Maria!” they exclaimed in horror.</p>

<p class="c004">“Just take a look outside, boys, will you? ’Tis but the
dogs playing about in the snow.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, but I saw him too plain through the window—his
head as big as a barrel, and eyes like burning coals!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ye saw not well,” said Roch, and, seeing that no one
cared to go into the yard, he went himself to calm them.</p>

<p class="c004">“I will tell you a tale about the Blessed Virgin,” he said
on his return, “and all your fancies will vanish away.”
He seated himself in his former place; his coolness somewhat
quieted them.</p>

<p class="c004">“It was long, long ago, ages ago; so long ago that the
tale is found only in very ancient books. In a certain village,
hard by Cracow, there dwelt a free peasant, Casimir
by name, and surnamed ‘the Hawk.’ His family, a good
one, had dwelt there from all time, and he tilled many a
thirty-five-acre piece of land. He had a forest of his own,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_207">207</span>a dwelling like a manor, and water-mill close to the river.
Our Lord had blessed him, and all went well with him; his
barns were always full of corn as his money-box was of
money; his children were blooming, his wife was without
reproach, and he himself a wise and kindly man, not proud
of heart, and just towards everyone.</p>

<p class="c004">“He ruled like a father in the assembly, always for justice,
anxious to be upright in all things, and ever the first
to help and save his neighbours.</p>

<p class="c004">“So he lived, soberly, quietly and happily, as one having
the Lord God at his fireside.</p>

<p class="c004">“Now one day the King sent to call the nation to war
against the Paynim.</p>

<p class="c004">“The Hawk was sorely troubled at heart, for he had no
wish to leave his home and go out to the wars.</p>

<p class="c004">“But then, there was the King’s messenger standing at
the door, and calling him to hasten.</p>

<p class="c004">“It was a very great war. The Turks, a vile brood! had
entered Poland, burning villages, robbing churches, slaying
priests, and putting the people to death, or driving them,
bound with cords, to their own country of infidels.</p>

<p class="c004">“To fight them was a duty. If, to defend his home and
kin, men and country, a man shall willingly lay down his
life, he is sure of eternal salvation.</p>

<p class="c004">“So he called the assembly, selected the stoutest and bravest
men he could find; and on the morrow, after Holy Mass,
all set out, some on horseback, others in chariots.</p>

<p class="c004">“The whole village went with him, with tears and great
lamentations, as far as the statue of Our Lady of Chenstohova,
which stands by the road, at the crossway.</p>

<p class="c004">“He fought for a year, for two years ... but at last no
news of him came any more.</p>

<p class="c004">“And when all the others had been back a long time, the
Hawk was still far away. So they thought he must have
been either slain or taken captive by the Turks; moreover,
the <i>Dziads</i> and wanderers who passed by said secretly much
that made them think so.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_208">208</span>“At length, at the end of the third year, he came back one
day in early spring; but all alone, without henchmen or
horses or chariots, in great poverty, and bearing a staff like
a beggar.</p>

<p class="c004">“He knelt down before the statue of the Blessed Virgin,
thanking her for his return to his own country; then he made
for the village, walking with swift steps.</p>

<p class="c004">“But none welcomed him, none knew who he was; and the
dogs attacked him, and he drove them off.</p>

<p class="c004">“He arrived at his home ... rubbed his eyes ...
crossed himself ... and knew not what it meant.</p>

<p class="c004">“Jesu Maria!—No granaries, no orchards, no hedges even!
and of live stock, not a single head.—Of his cabin, there remained
only the scorched and ruined walls.—No children
either! All was utterly destroyed. His wife rose at his approach
from a pallet of straw where she lay sick and in
pain, and she burst into most bitter tears!</p>

<p class="c004">“He stood thunderstruck.</p>

<p class="c004">“It had come to pass, while he was fighting and putting to
flight the enemies of the Lord, that the plague had entered
his cabin, and cut off all his children, and the lightning had
struck it and burned it down, and the wolves had eaten his
cattle. Then his neighbours seized upon his lands, the corn
had perished by drought, the rest of the crops by hailstorms:
and naught remained to him.</p>

<p class="c004">“Down he dropped on the threshold, ghastly as one dead.
But when evening fell, and the bell rang for the Angelus, he
started up, and began to curse and blaspheme in an awful
voice!</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Had he shed his blood in God’s service for this? for
this defended God’s churches?’</p>

<p class="c004">“In vain his wife tried to calm him; in vain she fell at
his feet and entreated him: he continued to curse and blaspheme.</p>

<p class="c004">“‘What! had he suffered wounds, and hunger, and been
honest and pious for this? No matter what he had been,
the Lord God had forsaken him, and decreed he should lose
all!’</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_209">209</span>“Most foully did he curse the name of God, and cry
that now he would give himself to Satan, who alone did not
forsake the wretches that call upon him.</p>

<p class="c004">“At those words, behold, Satan appeared before him!</p>

<p class="c004">“The Hawk, being very wroth, was now reckless, and cried
out:</p>

<p class="c004">“‘O devil, if you can help me, do; for I have been dealt
with most grievously!’</p>

<p class="c004">“Fool that he was, and unable to understand that this
was all but a trial, whereby our Lord would prove him!</p>

<p class="c004">“‘I will aid you,’ Satan hissed; ‘but will you give up
your soul to me?’</p>

<p class="c004">“‘I will—this instant!’</p>

<p class="c004">“So a compact was written, and signed with Casimir’s
blood.</p>

<p class="c004">“From that day forth, all things began to mend. He
himself did but little, only ordering and overseeing things.
Michalek (for so the devil chose to be called) worked for
him, helped by other devils, disguised as farm-servants or
as Germans; and in a short time the farm was in better
order, larger and more flourishing than it ever had been.</p>

<p class="c004">“Only there came no more children to them. For how,
indeed, could they come to a home so unblessed as that?</p>

<p class="c004">“This mortified the Hawk exceedingly. Also by night he
was wrung at the thought how he should support the everlasting
fire of hell.</p>

<p class="c004">“But Michalek took upon him to say that all rich folk—lords,
kings, men of learning, yea, and even such bishops
as were mighty on earth—had sold their souls to him. And
yet none of them cared for what might come to them after
death, and thought only of making merry and tasting all
the pleasures of this life to the full.</p>

<p class="c004">“Then was Casimir more at ease, and he became a yet
greater foe to God. With his own hands, he hewed down
the cross by the forest; he cast the holy images out of his
cabin, and would even have removed the statue of Our
Lady of Chenstohova, because it was in his way when he
ploughed. Hardly could his wife, with many prayers and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_210">210</span>tears and entreaties, prevail upon him to let it remain.</p>

<p class="c004">“The years flew by, like a rapid river. His wealth increased
enormously, and his importance along with it; so
that the King himself came to see the man, invited him to
Court, and gave him the post of chamberlain there.</p>

<p class="c004">“Now was he puffed up, and looked down upon all, oppressed
the poor, threw honesty to the winds, and cared no
whit for anyone in the world.</p>

<p class="c004">“He also most foolishly closed his mind against the
thought that he must one day pay dearly for all this.</p>

<p class="c004">“But at last the hour of reckoning arrived.</p>

<p class="c004">“Our Lord’s patience and mercy towards that hardened
sinner came to an end at last.</p>

<p class="c004">“And his doom and punishment swooped down upon him.</p>

<p class="c004">“First, he was assailed by sore diseases, which tortured
him unceasingly.</p>

<p class="c004">“Then the plague swept away all his castle.</p>

<p class="c004">“Next, his farm-buildings were struck by lightning and
burned to the ground.</p>

<p class="c004">“After which, his corn crops were ruined by hailstorms.</p>

<p class="c004">“Then such terrible droughts came that everything was
withered up and, being dry, burned to ashes; the very
ground was cracked and fissured, and his trees died for
lack of water.</p>

<p class="c004">“All men abandoned him, and Want sat down at his
threshold.</p>

<p class="c004">“He was exceeding sick, and his flesh fell from off his
bones, which began to rot.</p>

<p class="c004">“He called for Michalek and his fellow-demons to help
him; but without avail. When the hand of the Lord is
lifted up in anger against any man, Satan can do nothing.</p>

<p class="c004">“Instead of trying to aid him, the fiends, who were sure
that he was already theirs, blew fire into his horrible wounds
to make them rankle yet more.</p>

<p class="c004">“And now, nothing could save him but God’s mercy.</p>

<p class="c004">“Late in the autumn, there came so windy a night that
the gale tore off the roof of the cabin, and all the doors and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_211">211</span>windows; and with it there entered a troop of fiends that
fell to dancing as they pressed forwards with pitchforks to
the middle of the room, where the Hawk lay dying.</p>

<p class="c004">“His wife did what she could to protect him. Thrusting
a holy image in front of him, and chalking the sign of the
cross on the door and windows, she drove them out; but
she was most anxious lest he should die unreconciled to
God, and without the last sacraments. So, although he had
forbidden her, being hardened even at this last hour, and
though Satan sought to turn her back, she found an
opportunity, and slipped away to where the parish priest
lived.</p>

<p class="c004">“But he was just driving out, and did not care to attend
so wicked a man.</p>

<p class="c004">“‘God has abandoned him: he needs must belong to
Satan: I have nothing to do there.’ And off he drove to
play cards with the manor-folk.</p>

<p class="c004">“Weeping in bitter woe, the woman knelt down before
the statue of Our Lady of Chenstohova, and sobbed and
besought mercy for him from the bottom of her heart.</p>

<p class="c004">“And the Holy Virgin took pity, and spake to her:</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Woman,’ she said, ‘weep not: thy prayer is granted.’</p>

<p class="c004">“And down she came from the altar, just as she was:
crowned with gold, clad in her azure star-besprinkled
mantle, and with a rosary dangling at her side ... she,
the Holy Mother, like unto the morning star, all beaming
with loving-kindness! The woman fell upon her face
before her.</p>

<p class="c004">“With her sacred hands she raised her up compassionately,
wiped away her tears, and said tenderly:</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Take me to thy cabin, faithful servant; it may be that
I can do something.’</p>

<p class="c004">“She looked on the dying sinner, and her merciful heart
yearned within her at the sight.</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Thy husband must not die without a priest: the power
to shrive, that priests have received from God, is not mine;
for I am but a woman. That priest is an evil-doer, and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_212">212</span>cares not for his flock. For that will he answer to God; but
he alone can give absolution.... I will go myself to the
manor and fetch this gambler thence.—Here is my rosary:
keep the fiends at bay with it till I come back.’</p>

<p class="c004">“But how was she to go? The night was dark, windy,
rainy, miry. It was far to go, besides; and moreover, the
fiends set up obstacles everywhere to prevent her.</p>

<p class="c004">“Our Heavenly Lady dreaded none of these things. She
only muffled herself in a sheet of coarse drugget against the
foul weather, and went out into the darkness.</p>

<p class="c004">“Exhausted and quite drenched, she arrived at the manor,
knocked at the door, and humbly begged the priest to come
to a sick man; but, supposing her to be some poor woman,
and knowing how stormy it was out of doors, he sent her
word that he would come next day, being too busy just
then. So he went on playing, drinking, and enjoying himself
with the gentlemen there.</p>

<p class="c004">“Our Lord’s Mother sighed deeply at his evil behaviour;
but, causing a gilded coach and horses and servants to appear
at once, she went into the room, arrayed in the garb of
a castellan’s lady.</p>

<p class="c004">“Of course the priest set out with her at once and very
eagerly.</p>

<p class="c004">“They arrived, but only just in time; the man was almost
at his last gasp, and the fiends were making efforts to rush
in and carry him alive to hell, before the priest arrived with
the Sacred Host.</p>

<p class="c004">“The Hawk confessed, repented, was shriven, and gave
up the ghost. Our Lady herself closed his eyes; then, when
she had blessed his widow, she turned to the bewildered
priest and said:</p>

<p class="c004">“‘Follow thou me!’</p>

<p class="c004">“He did so, ever more and more amazed; but, looking
out of the cabin-door, saw neither coach nor servants—only
rain, mire, darkness—and Death dogging each of his steps!
Mightily afraid, he followed our Lady to the chapel.</p>

<p class="c004">“Then he beheld her, now in her mantle and crown, surrounded
<span class="pageno" id="Page_213">213</span>with a choir of angels, as she again took her place
upon the altar.</p>

<p class="c004">“Then he knew her for the queen of Heaven, and was terrified.
Falling on his knees, he wept aloud, and begged
her to have mercy.</p>

<p class="c004">“But the Blessed Virgin eyed him with indignation, and
said:</p>

<p class="c004">“Many a century shalt thou kneel here in penance for thy
sins, ere thou hast atoned for them!’</p>

<p class="c004">“And immediately he turned into stone, and remained in
that posture, weeping every night, holding out his hands to
her, and awaiting the hour of pardon. Thus has he been
kneeling for ages and ages.</p>

<p class="c004">“Amen!...</p>

<p class="c004">“Even at the present day, that same priest is to be seen in
Dombrova. The stone figure stands outside the church,
in perpetual memory of the fact, and as a warning to all
sinners.”</p>

<p class="c004">All listened with attention; all were subdued, filled with
wonder, awed and silenced.</p>

<p class="c004">For what could they say at such a moment—when the
soul, expanding like the iron which glows red-hot in the fire,
is so flooded with emotion and splendour that one has but
to strike upon it, and it shoots forth a starry shower, becoming,
as it were, a rainbow suspended between earth and
heaven?</p>

<p class="c004">And so they remained, hushed and silent, until the glow
that then filled them had dwindled and faded away.</p>

<p class="c004">Matthew took out his flute, and the touch of his cunning
fingers brought forth the anthem, “To Thy Protection, Holy
Mother of God....” with its touching, measureless, opalescent
melody, like gossamer-besprinkled dewdrops; and they
all, in low voices, took up the anthem after him.</p>

<p class="c004">And then, little by little, one by one, they went back to
their everyday mood and talk.</p>

<p class="c004">After a time the young people smiled and laughed; for
Teresa, the soldier’s wife, was asking them funny riddles.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_214">214</span>In a while, someone coming in said that Boryna was back
from the law-court, and drinking in the tavern with his
companions: at which Yagna quickly and quietly slipped
out. Antek slipped out too, catching up with her at the
outer entrance on the very threshold; he seized her hand
fast, and led her on to the outer yard, and through the
orchard, beyond the barns and granaries.</p>
<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_215">215</span>
  <!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER XI</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">Past the orchard, gliding swiftly, stooping forward as
they went under the snow-laden boughs, they ran
like frightened deer along by the barns and into the
murky snow-plain, into the starless night, into the unfathomable
stillness of the frozen waste.</p>

<p class="c004">So, speeding on, swallowed up by the shadows, they presently
forgot all the rest of the world. Each, with arm round
the other’s waist, seized in a tight grasp, ran along with
rapid steps, bending down, hip to hip—rejoicing, yet with
fear, silent, yet with hearts full of song—athwart the bluish
livid obscurity which enveloped them.</p>

<p class="c004">“Yagna?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Dearest?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Are you really here?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Can you doubt it?”</p>

<p class="c004">They said no more, and were at times forced to stop and
take breath.</p>

<p class="c004">Unable to speak for the throbbing of their hearts, and
forced besides to suppress their feelings, which else would
have burst out in a wild cry, they only glanced at one another;
their eyes darted still but ardent lightnings, and lips
flew to lips in an impetuous rush, and with such hungry
ravenous craving that they both reeled in ecstasy, panted for
breath, feeling the earth crumble beneath their feet, as it
were, while they fell into a fiery abyss—and, looking at one
another with eyes blinded by those flames, saw nothing
more!—And again they would dash forward—whither, they
could not tell: only longing to be farther, farther away—plunged
in the murkiest possible shadows, in the thickest intricacy
of gloom.</p>

<p class="c004">One more field passed—and yet another! Farther and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_216">216</span>deeper still—till nothing more was seen—till they could forget
the whole world, and their own existence, and enter the
realm of Fairyland, lost as in some strange dream, like to
the marvellous waking vision which they had had but now,
in Klemba’s hut!—And, indeed, they still felt the influence,
luminous in its vagueness, of those mystic legends they had
heard breathed low; they still were attuned to the diapason
of wonders and of miracles; and those same fantastic myths
were pouring a shower of unearthly blossoms into their
souls: entrancement, awe, intense stupefaction, intoxicating
bliss, unappeasable desire!</p>

<p class="c004">Yes, they were yet wrapped in that rainbow-coloured
mantle of marvellous ideal happenings; still, so to speak,
they followed in the wake of the wonderful pageant they had
seen go by; they traversed strange fabulous lands, and went
through all those superhuman scenes and actions, all those
wonders, those enchantments, those magical spells. They
beheld visions, swaying in the dark, floating along the sky,
expanding as they looked, and touching their hearts with
such telling power that they could not breathe for dread, but
stood pressed close one to the other, mute, terror-struck, and
gazing into the opaque bottomless depths of their dreams.
And their minds would then blossom forth into the blossoms
of fantasy—the beautiful flowers of faith and loving rapture
... and they sounded the extremes of admiration and
oblivious joy.</p>

<p class="c004">Then, returning to earth once more, they would search the
night with bewildered eyes, scarce knowing in which world
they were, whether those marvels had been realized, or were
all mere phantoms and creations of the brain.</p>

<p class="c004">“Say, Yagna, are you not afraid?”</p>

<p class="c004">“I? I would go with you to the very end of the world—die
with you!” she whispered with energy, pressing very close
to him.</p>

<p class="c004">“Were you waiting there for me?” he asked after a while.</p>

<p class="c004">“Dearest, at every opening of the door, I expected you!
I went there only for you; and how I feared you would fail
to come!”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_217">217</span>“Yet, when I came, ye feigned not to see me!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Nonsense. Should I look, with folks’ eyes upon me?—Ah,
there was that within me which yearned so, I wonder I
did not fall off my seat in a swoon.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Sweetest!”</p>

<p class="c004">“You sat behind me, and I knew it; but I feared to look
round—feared to speak: all the time my heart went pit-a-pat,
and beat so loud, I think folk must have heard.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I thought to find you at the Klembas’, and to leave with
you.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I meant to run straight home ... but ye constrained
me....”</p>

<p class="c004">“Against your will? Say, Yagna!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Nay ... more than once ... I thought that this might
come to pass!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Did you think so? Did you think so?” he whispered, in
a passion of love.</p>

<p class="c004">“Surely, Antek.—And besides ... there ... continually
... beyond the stile ... it was not well with us.”</p>

<p class="c004">“True.—Here, none will disturb us. We are alone.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, alone! And how thick this darkness is!” she murmured,
throwing her arms about his neck, and embracing
him with all the vehemence of her passionate soul.</p>

<p class="c004">Now there was no longer any wind; only a slight breeze
which from time to time caressed and cooled their burning
faces. Neither stars nor moon were visible: the sky was
louring, covered with thick clouds as with a ragged fleece,
and dark-brown as a herd of oxen upon a bare waste field.
Things loomed dimly afar, as if seen through expanses of
drab smoke, as if the whole world were but a tissue of fogs,
of darkness rolling around on every side, of seething murk.</p>

<p class="c004">A movement in the air—an uneasy vibration, scarce to
be felt, seemed floating forth from the forests, lost in the
night.</p>

<p class="c004">It was very dark: in the atmosphere, thrilled with a dreary
and ominous agitation, they were aware of a dull eerie motion,
of strange indefinite vibrations, of vague fearful mutterings
and lurking shapes that had no shape! Sometimes,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_218">218</span>on a sudden, feebly gleaming from out the voluminous
dusk, there appeared the spectral pallor of the snow-fields;
and a few glimmers—chilly, moist, viscous glimmers—would
coil and uncoil in snaky folds across the shadows;
and again the night would shut her eyelids fast, and the
darkness descended with a black impenetrable downpour,
in which all things were lost. The eye, no longer able to
perceive anything, now sounded the uttermost abyss of this
portentous invisibility, whose dull sepulchral deadness benumbed
and overwhelmed the mind.—But at times the veil
of obscurity was rent in twain, as by some mighty force,
and through that tremendous rift one could see the black-hue
expanse of heaven, serene and studded with stars.</p>

<p class="c004">And now—was it from fields or from huts? from the
sky above, or from the gloom-drowned horizons?—who can
say? ... but there came ... trembling ... muttering
... slinking ... what? voices, gleams, scarce audible
echoes—call them what you will: the ghosts of things and
sounds long ago dead and gone, now haunting the world
again, seemed moving to and fro in a ghastly procession,
expiring far away, as the light of a star may expire in the
abyss.</p>

<p class="c004">But these two paid little heed to all this. Within them
there raged a tempest; every minute it grew and grew, rolling
from heart to heart in a hurricane of hot unspoken desires,
of flashing glances, of shuddering pangs, of scorching kisses,
of words as stammering and incoherent and inarticulate as is
the thunder in the sky: of instants as mute as death, of
fondness so excruciating that they choked each other with
caresses, and their hugs gave them intense pain, while they
struggled to hurt and to be hurt for the delight of that pain;
and their eyes filmed over, and they could no longer see anything
at all!</p>

<p class="c004">Swept onward by the wild blast of their passion, blinded
to everything, maddened even to frenzy, forgetful of all,
and burning with the same mutual flame, they had, in that
night of palpable darkness, fled out into the loneliness of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_219">219</span>the silent waste, about to give themselves to each other entirely,
“till death did them part,” and from the very bottom
of their souls that were starving with the insatiable hunger
of unfulfilled desire.</p>

<p class="c004">They were by this time unable to speak, save for a few
instinctive cries that welled out of their inmost being—a
few strangled whispers, thrown forth as spasmodically, as
fitfully, as the flames of a fire—rambling, raving, insane
words—with hungry devouring looks, looks of frenzy mixed
with haggard terror, looks that betrayed the storm that
raged within.—Till at last there swept over him and her a
convulsion so irresistible, such an uncontrollable spasm of
craving, that, losing their senses completely, they closed with
a mad frantic cry ... and fell!</p>

<p class="c004">And, with them, their whole world reeled and crashed
headlong into the abyss!</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, I am beside myself!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Be silent, dear, be silent!”</p>

<p class="c004">“I cannot; else I should go mad!”</p>

<p class="c004">“My heart is bursting asunder!”</p>

<p class="c004">“And my blood burns my veins!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Death—is it death coming—or a swoon?”</p>

<p class="c004">“My own, my own!”</p>

<p class="c004">“O Antek!”</p>

<hr class="c011"/>

<p class="c004">Even as those elements which combine to form life wake
up in the early months of every year, and—impelled by
eternal affinity—set out to seek one another throughout the
world, from end to end of earth and sky, until they meet in
springtime, and unite, and bring forth to our astonished
eyes now flowers, now babes, now huge green trees that murmur
in the wind:</p>

<p class="c004">So they too, after long days of desire and torment, days
of greyness and of void, met, found each other, mingled with
an uncontrollable cry, rushing into one another’s arms, and
clinging close: Just so may two pine-trees, uprooted by
the storm and tossed together in a desperate embrace, strive
<span class="pageno" id="Page_220">220</span>with might and main, wrestling in a mortal grip, whirling,
reeling, rebounding—till they both drop to the ground and
die!</p>

<p class="c004">And over these two did the night weave her veil of
shadows, that the things which were to be might come to
pass.</p>

<hr class="c011"/>

<p class="c004">Somewhere among those shadows, partridges were heard to
pipe, so near at hand that the passage of the whole covey
was distinctly audible. A quick rustling sounded—wings
flapping the snow for an upward flight. Other noises, keen
and shrill, broke the stillness now and then; and from the
village that therefore could hardly be very far away, there
came the loud though muffled crowing of cocks.</p>

<p class="c004">“It must be late,” she whispered timidly.</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, it is yet long before midnight: ’tis only change of
weather makes them crow.”</p>

<p class="c004">“A thaw is setting in.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, the snow is softer now.”</p>

<p class="c004">Some hares, not far from the rock under which they were
sitting, then fell to squeaking, playing about and gambolling
merrily; and presently a whole band of them darted by, so
near them that they shrank in alarm.</p>

<p class="c004">“’Tis pairing-time; the little beasts are so excited that
they fear nothing.... Spring will soon be here.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I thought some large creature was rushing at us!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Hush!” he hissed in sudden terror. “Crouch low!”</p>

<p class="c004">They silently crept close to the rock. Out of the dusk,
less black because of the reflecting snow, appeared long
shadows, stalking some prey, advancing slowly, slowly,
pressed close to the ground, and sometimes completely vanishing—swallowed
up, as it were, by the earth; their eyes
alone shining greenly phosphorescent, like glow-worms in a
copse. The creatures were about forty yards away, but soon
farther, disappearing into the darkness.... And then, all
at once, came the throttled scream of a hare in mortal
jeopardy ... a scraping and a scuffling of feet ... a rattle
and a snarl, the sound of crunched bones, a fierce growling;
<span class="pageno" id="Page_221">221</span>and then once more silence, deep and dreadful, prevailed all
around.</p>

<p class="c004">“Wolves.—Tearing a hare piecemeal.”</p>

<p class="c004">“If they had scented us!”</p>

<p class="c004">“They could not: the wind blows towards us.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I am afraid. Let us go. I feel cold as ice,” she said
with a shudder.</p>

<p class="c004">He took her in his arms. She warmed to his kisses, and
oblivion of all things came over them once more. With one
arm tight round the other’s waist, they both went along
their straggling way, swinging and bending to and fro, as
trees do, when, too heavily laden with blossoms, they wave
restfully to the gentle hum of bees.</p>

<p class="c004">They spoke rarely; but their kisses and sighs and passionate
ejaculations, their low blissful murmurs and rapturous
heart-beats, vibrated above them and around, as the
warm air trembles and quivers over a field in springtime.
For now they were like those vast plains all in flower,
plunged in the radiance and harmony of joy; thus did they
glow, with eyes like opening buds; thus did their souls
echo back the hot perfumes of meadows basking in the sunbeams,
the shimmering of brooks, the low faint twittering of
birds. Their beating hearts were in unison with those
springtide regions; and the words they uttered—few, full of
meaning, and scarce audible—welled forth from their innermost
souls, as young shoots burst from the parent tree at the
dawn of a May morning; their breaths were like the zephyrs
that fondle the sprouting corn, and their souls like a day
in the spring season—sunny as the rising blades of wheat,
and not less full of the songs of larks, of brightness, of
whispering, of dazzling virescence, and the irresistible gladness
of life!</p>

<p class="c004">Then again they grew silent and stopped short, seized with
awe of something they knew not what, which was about to
be: as when a cloud floats over the sun, and the world at
once waxes still and sad, and darkens with uneasy misgiving.</p>

<p class="c004">But they soon shook off this mood, and joy again burst
out in their bosoms with a great conflagration; glee once
<span class="pageno" id="Page_222">222</span>more swept the chords of their hearts, and now they were
flying up with bliss, compelled to soar.—And, all unwittingly,
they burst out into passionate and delirious song.</p>

<p class="c004">They swayed to the rhythm of their voices, which rose as
on many-coloured pinions, and sped through the dead stillness
of the night in a star-seeking, fiery rush.</p>

<p class="c004">And now, completely beside themselves, they strode along,
each leaning on the other, driven on by a blind impulse, lost
in their mutual love, oblivious of all things, entranced by the
spell of a superhuman emotion, which lifted them up to the
topmost heights of entrancement, and forced its way out in
that timeless, formless, almost wordless chant of theirs!</p>

<p class="c004">A wild and a stormy chant it was, rushing torrentially out
of their burning hearts, and pouring forth into the world
with its all-conquering strain of love!</p>

<p class="c004">How it flamed in the sombre chaos of the night! How it
lit up the wilds like a bush burning in the desert!</p>

<p class="c004">Now it was like the dull and ponderous growl of the
waters, when they arise in their strength, and shatter their
icy bonds.</p>

<p class="c004">Now it was scarce to be heard—a sweet melodious whisper,
sounding and rustling faintly, like corn that waves in the
sunshine!</p>

<p class="c004">And, after a while, it resembled the lay of frightened
birds that rise to the sun on frenzied fluttering wings, and at
last (their bosoms expanded with soaring up towards those
infinite heights) utter forth the triumphant hymn of the
earth, the immortal cry of life and existence!</p>

<p class="c004">“Yagna!” Antek whispered, as if surprised to know she
was by his side.</p>

<p class="c004">“Here I am.”—But her reply seemed subdued and sorrowful.</p>

<p class="c004">They were now upon the pathway that skirted the village,
at some distance outside of the encircling granaries, but on
the side next to Boryna’s farm.</p>

<p class="c004">All at once, Yagna burst out crying.</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, what is amiss?”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_223">223</span>“I cannot tell: something has come over me, and forced
the tears to start.”</p>

<p class="c004">Greatly distressed, he made her sit down with him close
to a granary with outstanding beams; there he gathered her
tenderly in his arms, rocking her on his breast like a child.
Her tears continued to flow, as dew distilling from flowers;
he wiped them away, but they still flowed on.</p>

<p class="c004">“Are you afraid of anything?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Of what, pray? Only within me there waxes a stillness
as though Death stood here beside me; yet all the while
something lifts me up, so that I would fain climb the sky,
and sail away among the clouds.”</p>

<p class="c004">He replied nothing. The light had all at once gone out
of their souls; a shadow passing over them troubled their
calm and bore in upon them a strange sense of longing, which
made them cling yet closer one to the other, and seek yet
more earnestly to find mutual support, each vying with the
other in the desire to flee away into some unknown world.</p>

<p class="c004">The wind rose; the trees rocked in ghastly wise, covering
them both with moist snow; the close-pressed louring clouds
began to fall swiftly asunder and roll away, while a low
tremulous moan floated across the fields.</p>

<p class="c004">“’Tis late, ’tis late; we must run home,” she whispered,
half rising.</p>

<p class="c004">“Do not fear: people are not yet asleep: I can hear them
on the road.—Coming back from Klemba’s, belike.”</p>

<p class="c004">“But I left the food-tubs in the byre; the kine may break
their legs on them.”</p>

<p class="c004">The voices they heard grew louder and then fainter again
and more remote, while they stood silent. But on one side
of them—on the very same pathway, it seemed—the snow
crunched crisply, and a tall shadow came out of the gloom,
showing so plain that they both started to their feet.</p>

<p class="c004">“Someone is there, skulking behind that hedge!”</p>

<p class="c004">“That’s mere fancy: night-clouds often throw such moving
shadows.”</p>

<p class="c004">They peered long into the darkness, listening intently.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_224">224</span>“Come,” he then whispered to her, “let us go to the haystack:
we shall be more at ease there.”</p>

<p class="c004">Looking round anxiously every now and then, they held
their breath as they stopped to listen; but all was as still
as death. So on they went, stooping forward cautiously,
till they got to the haystack, and disappeared in the deep
opening that yawned just above the ground.</p>

<hr class="c011"/>

<p class="c004">All was pitch-dark again; the clouds had come together,
forming an impenetrable mass: the pale starlight was
quenched, and the night, closing its eyes, had fallen into a
deep sleep. The stillness grew yet more intense, more awful,
broken only by the waving of the snow-burdened trees, and
the water babbling under the mill-wheels far, far away.</p>

<p class="c004">But after a long interval, the snow upon the road crackled
once more beneath steps—still, stealthy steps like the tread
of a wolf. A shadow passed along, close to the walls, and,
crouching down, made its way through the snow, ever nearer
and nearer.... It grew larger ... stopped many a time,
to go forward again ... passed round the hayrick on the
outer side and, creeping up to the opening, listened long and
closely.</p>

<p class="c004">Then it went away to the stile, and vanished among the
trees.</p>

<p class="c004">About a minute afterwards, it appeared again, bearing a
truss of straw. It stopped, listened awhile, and then, springing
forward to the haystack, thrust the truss of straw into
the hole, rammed it in tight ... and struck a match. Instantly
the straw was in flames and shot out many a blazing
tongue, which presently burst into a sheet of red fire, spreading
all over one side of the rick.</p>

<p class="c004">And Boryna, pitchfork in hand, head lowered, stood there
watching, white as a sheet!</p>

<p class="c004">They at once realized their position; a ruddy glow already
lit the darkness of the den where they lay, and a pungent
smoke filled the air. They beat wildly about on one side
and another, finding no issue, maddened with horror, and
scarcely able to breath. But, by marvellous good luck,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_225">225</span>Antek happened upon the tarpaulin cover and, pushing with
all his might, tore it down, falling to the ground along with
it. Ere he could rise, Boryna was upon him with pitchfork
raised to pin him to the earth. He missed: Antek leaped
up and, before the old man could aim a second thrust,
felled him with a blow of his fist in the chest—and fled.</p>

<p class="c004">Boryna, up in an instant, rushed to the haystack; but
Yagna too was no longer there, having slipped out and disappeared
in the night. And then, in the voice of one raving
mad with rage, he roared out: “Fire! Fire!” and ran
round the hayrick, wielding his pitchfork, and looking for
all the world like a fiend in the blood-red glow....—The
fire had by now got complete hold of the stack—hissing,
humming, roaring, and raising on high its pillar of flame
and of smoke.</p>

<p class="c004">Folk came along in haste; the cry of “Fire!” had quickly
spread through the village. Someone had rung the alarm-bell,
and every heart was throbbing with fear. But the
flame of the conflagration rose ever higher and higher, waving
its fiery mantle from side to side, and raining a torrent
of red sparks over all the buildings, both near it and
throughout the whole village.</p>
<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_226">226</span>
  <!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER XII</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">The morrow which followed that memorable night was
full of great excitement; and all Lipka swarmed like
an ant-hill when a naughty boy has thrust a stick
into it.</p>

<p class="c004">Dawn had scarcely risen, people had but just begun to rub
their eyes and wake up, when they all of one accord made
their way to the scene of the fire. Some even said their
prayers as they went, to save time, and hurried along as to a
fair.</p>

<p class="c004">The day rose, blurred as with mist; for the snow, coming
down in great soft flakes, threw its wet ragged cloak over
everything. That, however, no one minded; all gathered in
groups, and stood for hours together on the spot, talking in
low tones about the events of the night, and pricking up their
ears to get at any new detail that might offer.</p>

<p class="c004">The rick was in ruins—so completely burned down that
nothing had been left standing save the two supports it had
been built upon. And these too were like half-burnt-out
brands. The thatch had also been torn from the sties and
the shed, down to the very girders. The pathway and
neighbouring land were, for half the length of a field, covered
with burnt thatch, splinters of laths, ashes of straw,
bits of charred wood.</p>

<p class="c004">The snow continued to fall, and after a time overspread
everything with a glistening sheet, which the glowing embers
had thawed in places. Here and there, too, there issued
streams of smoke or even pale hissing flames from heaps of
hay that had been pulled from the rick, which the men set
to work upon with hedge-bills, stamping out the flames with
their clogs, beating the hay with sticks, and heaping it over
with snow.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_227">227</span>They were just at work on one of those smouldering heaps,
when a lad fished out a charred rag and held it aloft.</p>

<p class="c004">“’Tis Yagna’s apron!” Kozlova sneered; for they all knew
what had taken place, or guessed it shrewdly.</p>

<p class="c004">“Search well, lads; ye may also find a pair of hose.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Oh, no! he carried them off unscathed ... unless he lost
them by the way!”</p>

<p class="c004">“The lasses have been after them all the time, but someone
was too quick and got them first.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Silence, babblers!” the Soltys shouted indignantly.
“Come ye to make merry here, and grin over your neighbour’s
misfortune?—Off, women! get you home; what do ye,
standing here?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Meddle not with our business, but do your own; for that
only are ye in office!” Kozlova retorted in such shrill tones
of anger that the Soltys looked her in the face, spat with disgust,
and withdrew to the farm-yard. No one moved an
inch; and the women set to pushing the singed apron about
with their clogs, and confer together in fierce tones.</p>

<p class="c004">“Such a one,” Kozlova said aloud, “should be treated as
witches were dealt with of old—driven out from amongst
us with a lighted candle and an oven-poker!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Surely! Has not all this befallen through her fault?”
chimed in Sikora’s wife.</p>

<p class="c004">“It is,” put in Sohova gently, “a mercy of the Lord that
the whole village has not been burnt down!”</p>

<p class="c004">“True: a miracle, a miracle indeed.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes; there was no wind, and they gave the alarm at
once.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Besides, the alarm-bell was rung, and we were only in
our first sleep.”</p>

<p class="c004">“It is likely the bear-leaders, who were coming from the
tavern, were the first to see it.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, no, my dear! Boryna caught them inside the haystack,
and had only just separated them, when the fire broke
out. Last night, when I saw them at the Klembas’, going
out together, I was sure something of the sort would happen.”</p>

<p class="c004">“The old man had long been on the watch to catch them.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_228">228</span>“My son tells me he had been walking about outside
Klemba’s ever so long, waiting for them,” Kobusova remarked.</p>

<p class="c004">“Antek must have set the rick on fire out of spite.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Did he not threaten he would do so?”</p>

<p class="c004">“It could not but have ended in some such way; it could
not,” Kozlova put in.</p>

<p class="c004">Meanwhile, another group of housewives were also whispering,
but lower and to more purpose.</p>

<p class="c004">“Do you know? Boryna has swinged Yagna so, that she
is now lying sick in her mother’s house!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Certainly; he turned her out at dawn, and sent her chest
with all her things after her,” Balcerek’s wife, who had
hitherto said nothing, told them now.</p>

<p class="c004">Ploshka’s wife contradicted her:</p>

<p class="c004">“Pray do not talk at random; I was in the hut just now,
and her chest is standing there.</p>

<p class="c004">“But,” she added in a higher key, “on her wedding-day I
foretold it would come to this.”</p>

<p class="c004">“O my God!” Sohova groaned, raising her open hands,
“what an awful, awful thing!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, well, he will be locked up for it, and that’s all!”</p>

<p class="c004">“It is but just: we might all have been burnt out.”</p>

<p class="c004">“I,” said Ploshka’s wife, “was beginning to enjoy my first
sleep, when Luke, who had been running about with the
bear-leaders, came tapping at my window-pane and crying:
‘Fire!’—Jesu Maria! the window was as red as hot embers....
And I felt so faint, I could not budge one inch....
And the bell tolled, and the people shrieked....”</p>

<p class="c004">Here someone broke in: “No sooner had I heard there
was a fire at Boryna’s than I knew it was Antek’s doing.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Tush, ye talk as though ye had seen him do it.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Seen him I have not; but all say it is he.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, Yagustynka has been whispering something of the
sort for ever so long.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Of course they will put him in the stocks, and then in
prison.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_229">229</span>“But,” cried Balcerkova, whose pride was that she knew
the law, “what can they do to him? Who has seen the
man? What witnesses are there?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Well, but did not Boryna catch him in the act?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes; but not in <i>that</i> act.—Besides, even had it been that,
his testimony is worthless, because he is at odds with his
son!”</p>

<p class="c004">“After all, ’tis the court’s business, not ours; but who,
before God and man, is guilty of it all, if not that foul
wench Yagna?” Balcerkova continued sternly, raising her
voice.</p>

<p class="c004">“You say true!—Ah, such wickedness, such depravity!”
they assented, speaking lower and thronging closer, as they
recounted her former misdeeds.</p>

<p class="c004">Little by little, their voices rose loud in condemnation of
Yagna’s behaviour. All the old offences which had caused
their hatred, now again returned to their minds: a shower of
epithets, reproaches, threats, and evil spiteful words, were
hurled at her; and their fury was so hot that, had she appeared
among them at that instant, she would surely have
been attacked and beaten.</p>

<p class="c004">The men, on the other side, were discussing Antek, more
calmly, but not with less animosity. Every heart was full
of indignation and bitterness. More than one fist was
shaken with dangerous menace, more than one word of harsh
import flew about. Even Matthew, who had been on his
side at first, forsook him now, only saying:</p>

<p class="c004">“Well, if the man had dared to attempt such a thing, he
must needs be out of his mind.”</p>

<p class="c004">Thereupon the blacksmith entered the lists, speaking
loud, with furious passion, and pointing out to them that
Antek had long ago threatened his father he would burn him
down; that Boryna had known of his threats, and been in
the habit of keeping watch every night.</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, I could take my oath it was he that did it.—Besides,
there are witnesses who will speak; he must—he must
be punished! Was he not always plotting with the farm-hands,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_230">230</span>setting them against their betters, egging them on to
evil deeds?—Yes, and I know,” he cried in threatening
tones, “I know more than one of these—I see them here
before me, and they hear me speak ... and yet they dare to
stand up for such a scoundrel—one who taints the whole
place!... To prison, to Siberia with the wretch! What—with
his own stepmother! Was not that crime heinous
enough, without adding to it arson besides? ’Tis a wonder
any of us is yet alive!”... And so he went on, shrieking
and shouting so vehemently that he might be guessed to
have a purpose in doing so.</p>

<p class="c004">Roch, who stood with Klemba not far off, took good note
of this, and said:</p>

<p class="c004">“Ye make a mighty uproar against him, yet ye were drinking
with him in the tavern only yesterday!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Whoso would beggar all the village is my foe!”</p>

<p class="c004">“And yet,” Klemba gravely remarked, “the Squire is no
foe of yours!”</p>

<p class="c004">The smith then strode off amongst the people, stirring
them up, calling them to take revenge, and laying unheard-of
offences to Antek’s account; and his hearers, already greatly
moved, were presently wrought to the very highest pitch of
rage. Some began to cry that the incendiary ought to be
seized, fettered, and taken to the police-court; while others,
of yet more fiery mettle (those especially whose ribs had in
days past felt Antek’s cudgel), were now looking for sticks,
intending to drag him from his cabin and give him such a
thrashing as he would remember to his dying day.</p>

<p class="c004">The clamour grew, with cries, threats, curses, and a hullabaloo
so great that the folk swayed hither and thither like
a spinney in a gale, rolling to and from the palings of the
enclosure, and preparing to pour out through the gate into
the road. The Voyt came to pacify them, but without avail;
nor did the Soltys and the elders of the village succeed any
better. Their voices were lost in the uproar, and they were
themselves swept away by the torrent. No one heeded
what they said: everyone dashed on, tore along, and shouted
<span class="pageno" id="Page_231">231</span>with all the force of his lungs: the whole band, carried forward
by a tempest of hate, appeared like men possessed.</p>

<p class="c004">At that moment, Kozlova elbowed her way forward,
vociferating:</p>

<p class="c004">“There are two culprits: let both be dragged to the place
of their crime and judged there!”</p>

<p class="c004">The married women, especially the poorest of all, took up
the cry with a hideous bellow and, with arms stretched forth,
placed themselves by her side. The mob rolled on with
the din of a raging torrent.</p>

<p class="c004">The howling and shrieking grew as they went on, delayed
by the narrow fenced road; they all pressed together, surging
along, shrieking, shaking their fists, and lurched against
one another, glaring with sinister glances; and a savage
many-sounding voice, the cry of universal exasperation,
burst from them as they hastened on, intent upon their purpose.—Suddenly
those in front cried out:</p>

<p class="c004">“The priest! the priest!—And with the Sacred Host!”</p>

<p class="c004">At this the mob moved uneasily, as if held back by a
chain—wavered, spread out upon the road, stopped, and
broke up into little groups. A hush fell all at once upon
them: they were struck speechless—fell on their knees and,
kneeling, bowed down their heads.</p>

<p class="c004">It was indeed the priest, coming out of the church, and
bearing with him Christ’s Body—the holy viaticum. Ambrose
walked on in front, ringing a bell and swinging a
lantern.</p>

<p class="c004">He went swiftly past, and presently, in the eddying snowfall,
was seen only as a dim blur outside a frozen window-pane.
Then they rose from their knees.</p>

<p class="c004">“Going over to Filipka. She was so starved with cold
in the forest yesterday that she has been scarce able to
breathe since dawn. They say she will not hold out till
night.”</p>

<p class="c004">“He has also been called to Bartek of the sawmill.”</p>

<p class="c004">“What’s amiss with him?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, know ye not? A falling tree-trunk has crushed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_232">232</span>the man so, that he is not likely ever to be well again.” So
they whispered—still gazing after the priest, now almost unseen.</p>

<p class="c004">Several of the elder dames had joined him to follow in
procession, together with a large party of men; and the
rest stood uncertain, like a flock of sheep which their dog
has headed round. All their resentment had evaporated, the
back of the riot was broken, the din ceased. They looked at
one another, scratched their heads or mumbled some unconnected
words; several were ashamed of themselves, spat on
the ground, and slunk off. Part of the crowd thus leaked
away like water, creeping through fences and into wayside
cabins. Kozlova alone went on ranting in spite of all, and
threatening Antek and Yagna; but, seeing himself without
adherents, she had a passage of arms with Roch (who had
told her certain truths), and then went back to the village.
In the end but few remained, watching at the place of the
disaster, lest the fire should break out anew.</p>

<p class="c004">The blacksmith, too, remained in the farm-yard, much
vexed with the course of events. He spoke no more to anyone,
but prowled about, prying into holes and corners, and
more than once driving Lapa away for persistently following
him and barking.</p>

<p class="c004">All this time, Boryna was nowhere to be seen. He was,
they said, fast asleep under his bed-clothes; and only
Yuzka, with eyes red from crying, peeped out of doors for
a moment to disappear immediately. Yagustynka did the
farm-yard work alone, as waspish that morning as could possibly
be. It was no use speaking to her, and after a few answers
that stung like nettles, no one cared to try.</p>

<p class="c004">Punctually at noon, a clerk and several gendarmes arrived
in Lipka. They wrote a great deal, and made much
inquiry into the causes of the fire: which made all present
take themselves off pretty quickly, fearing to be called as
witnesses.</p>

<p class="c004">No one was even seen about the roads; but this was because
the snow, falling ceaselessly and yet moister than before,
was melting ere it touched the earth, and covered the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_233">233</span>whole country with a layer of half-liquid slush. But the
folk at home were as lively as bees in a hive; that day had
brought them an unexpected respite from their work; few
did anything at all, and at some farms the cows were lowing
over their empty mangers. In every cabin, people were
busily discussing the great event, and often someone would
pass from hut to hut: old dames especially, wagging eager
tongues. So, from hearth to hearth, news went fluttering
round like crows; and at windows and front doors, and elsewhere
within the enclosures, many an inquisitive face was
seen, watching for Antek to appear, going by in the clutch
of the law!</p>

<p class="c004">Their curiosity increased hourly, still unsatisfied. Every
now and then, someone would rush in, with the breathless
announcement that the gendarmes were at Antek’s; or swore
that he had overpowered them, broken his fetters, and got
away. And others had other facts at hand, not less sure
than these.</p>

<p class="c004">One thing was beyond doubt. Vitek had run to the tavern
to get vodka, and great volumes of smoke were pouring
out of Boryna’s chimney: which told of good cheer preparing
within.</p>

<p class="c004">Then evening came, clerk and gendarmes drove off in
the Voyt’s britzka.—But Antek was not along with them!</p>

<p class="c004">Great was the wonder and disappointment of the village
folk. All had expected to see him carried off in chains.
It was in vain that they put their heads together to guess
what the old man’s testimony had been. That only the
Voyt and the Soltys knew: and they kept their own counsel.
So the village was in a fever of curiosity; and manifold
conjectures, some of them quite incredible, were put
forth.</p>

<p class="c004">The night fell slowly, dark and quiet enough; the snow
no longer fell, and there were signs of a slight frost at hand;
for a star or two glittered in the sky, and a bleak wind was
hardening the wet expanses of snow which began to break
underfoot into thin crackling splinters. Lights shone from
within the cabins, where the folk, closely crowded, rested
<span class="pageno" id="Page_234">234</span>from the emotions of the day and gave rein to yet more
conjectures and surmises.</p>

<p class="c004">The field was a wide one. Antek had not been arrested:
so he was innocent of having burnt the rick. Then who
was guilty? Not Yagna, certainly: no one dreamed she was.
And as little did anyone think of accusing old Boryna.</p>

<p class="c004">So they groped and groped in the dark, quite unable to
find any solution of the mystery. There was no hut wherein
the question was not debated, nor any where they arrived
at the truth. The only outcome of all these debates was that
people were no longer set against Antek. Even his enemies’
mouths were stopped; and his friends, Matthew amongst
them, once more lifted up their voices in his favour. On
the other hand, their fierce hatred for Yagna became still
more envenomed. With cruel tongues, the women set themselves
to deal with her, dragging her as through a wilderness
of thorns and briers. Dominikova, too, came in for her
share, and no small one either: being all the more spitefully
treated, because no one could say what had become of
Yagna; her mother had driven all busybodies from her
door, as one drives away troublesome dogs.</p>

<p class="c004">But all unanimously felt profound compassion and sympathy
for Hanka, whom they pitied sincerely, and heartily
condoled with. Klemba’s wife and Sikora had even gone to
her that same evening, bearing with them presents in
bundles for the poor woman.</p>

<p class="c004">Thus that memorable day went by. The next, things were
once more as usual. Curiosity and resentment had cooled
down, indignation was blunted and subdued: the daily round
of work began again, and they bent their necks to the yoke,
and accepted the lot which the Lord God had given them.</p>

<p class="c004">At times, indeed, people would talk of what had taken
place, but more and more seldom now, and ever with less
keen interest.</p>

<p class="c004">March coming round, the weather grew really intolerable:
dark, muggy, dreary, with such deluges of rain and sleet
that to stay within doors was almost a necessity. The sun
seemed to have lost itself somewhere among those low-lying
<span class="pageno" id="Page_235">235</span>masses of cloud, and often did not shine for one second
throughout the livelong day. The snows melted, or softened
only, taking a dingy greenish hue, like mouldy walls; the
furrows were filled with water, and it flooded the lower lands,
and the outlying premises of the farms; and during the
nights a frost would frequently come and make walking
along the slippery roads and paths no easy matter.</p>

<p class="c004">And this abominable weather made folks think less and
less about the late fire; the more so, because neither Boryna
nor Antek nor Yagna excited curiosity by appearing in
public. Thus did the event fall into oblivion, as a stone
falls into a stream; the water swirls and eddies over it,
ripples, breaks, trembles ... and flows calmly on as before.</p>

<p class="c004">And so things went on until Shrove-Tuesday, the last day
before Lent.</p>

<p class="c004">It was somewhat of a holiday, and since the dawn a good
deal of bustling had been going on about the cabins. From
well-nigh every home someone had gone to town to get
various articles, especially meat—or at least a bit of sausage
or fat bacon. Only the very poorest had to be satisfied
with a herring (bought on credit from the Jew) with
a dish of boiled potatoes and salt.</p>

<p class="c004">But, ever since noontide, the wealthier housewives had
been frying doughnuts; and the odours of burnt dripping,
and baked meats, and other viands yet more alluring, filled
the air of the whole place.</p>

<p class="c004">Once more did the bear-leaders make their appearance,
straying from hut to hut and performing; and the shouts of
the lads who accompanied them echoed now from one part
of the village, now from another.</p>

<p class="c004">And in the evening, when supper was over, the band
played in the tavern; everyone that could move his legs
hastened thither, caring not one whit for the sleet that had
begun pouring down with the twilight.</p>

<p class="c004">They enjoyed themselves with particular gusto, because
it was the last time dancing was allowed before Eastertide.
Matthew played the flute, and Pete (Boryna’s man) accompanied
<span class="pageno" id="Page_236">236</span>him on the fiddle, while Yasyek Topsy-turvy
performed on the drum.</p>

<p class="c004">And all danced with extraordinary life and spirit, until
such time as the tolling of the church-bell signified to them
that midnight had come—and that the Carnival was over.</p>

<p class="c004">At once the band ceased playing, the dances stopped;
everyone promptly dispatched what food remained, and all
went home—except old Ambrose, who, fairly drunk, stayed
singing outside the tavern, according to his wont.</p>

<p class="c004">No lights shone anywhere but in Dominikova’s cabin;
but there, it was said, the Voyt and the Soltys sat in conference
till the second cock-crow, to reconcile Yagna and
Boryna.</p>

<p class="c004">And when the whole village was fast asleep, and the land
at rest (the rain having stopped about midnight), they
were still deep in conference.</p>

<p class="c004">But in Antek’s hut there was no joyous Carnival, no quiet
sleep, nor any peace at all.</p>

<p class="c004">God alone knows, and no human tongue can tell, what
passed in Hanka’s mind during those long days and nights
since she had met her husband outside the hut, when he
forced her to go in.</p>

<p class="c004">For that same night she had been told all by Veronka.</p>

<p class="c004">The agony of it slew her soul within her, and it lay like
a naked corpse, horrible in death. For the first day or two,
she hardly stirred from her distaff and spinning-gear:
though she spun nothing, only moving her hands mechanically,
as one in a deathly slumber, gazing within herself,
looking on the storm of sufferings that were hers, and on
the miserable chaos of burning tears, wrongs borne, injustice
suffered. All that time she neither ate nor slept; even her
children’s cries could not recall her to herself. Veronka
had pity on her, and took care of the little ones, and of her
old father, too, who—to make matters worse—had fallen
ill after that expedition to the forest, and lay upon the top
of the baking-oven, moaning low.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek, one might say, was never at home, going out at
dawn and returning only late at night. But she now felt
<span class="pageno" id="Page_237">237</span>herself unable to say a single word to him. It was impossible:
her soul, hardened, as it were, in the fire, had become
like stone.</p>

<p class="c004">Only on the third day did she wake up, as out of a horrible
dream. But how changed! Coming back from that
trance of death, she was in appearance no longer the same
person: grey, faded, wrinkled, many a year older in looks,
and now hard and rigid as though she had been carved in
wood. Only her eyes glowed, cold and keen; and her lips
were set hard.—So thin had she grown that her clothes hung
on her as upon a peg.</p>

<p class="c004">And thus she came back to life again. Although her former
self was now burnt to ashes, she was aware within her
soul of a wonderful power that she never had felt before—of
a stubborn force of living and fighting, and of the settled
certitude that she would overcome at last.</p>

<p class="c004">She at once flew to her wailing children, took them in her
arms, and well-nigh smothered them with kisses; and she
burst with them into a long sweet flood of tears that were
a true relief to her, soothing her anguish greatly.</p>

<p class="c004">She quickly set the hut in order, and went round to
Veronka to thank her for her kindness, and entreat her to
forgive the past. They were at once good friends again,
which her sister took as a matter of course. Not so the
fact—the inexplicable fact—that Hanka never breathed a
word of reproach against Antek, or even complained of her
own sad fate.</p>

<p class="c004">“I feel like a widow now,” she said; “I am alone, and must
take thought for the little ones and for everything.”</p>

<p class="c004">That same evening she went to see the Klembas and
other acquaintances, and ask them how things were going
on at Boryna’s, whose words, so lately heard, were ever in
her mind.</p>

<p class="c004">Instead, however, of going at once to him, she waited a
few days more; and it was only when Ash-Wednesday had
come round that she put on her best clothes, committed her
little ones to Veronka’s keeping, and—without even preparing
breakfast—made ready to go out.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_238">238</span>“Whither away so early?” Antek inquired.</p>

<p class="c004">“To the Ash-Wednesday service,” she replied, slowly and
evasively.</p>

<p class="c004">“Will you not get breakfast ready?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Get ye to the tavern; the Jew will give you credit still,”
she could not help answering: the words came out unawares.</p>

<p class="c004">He started up, as if he had got a blow; but she went out
unheeding.</p>

<p class="c004">Now his shouts, his fury, affrighted her no more. He
was a stranger, and so remote from her that she was herself
astonished. And though, from time to time, something like
the last flicker of her old fondness rose up in her heart from
embers now covered over and trodden down, she at once
quenched them by recalling the memory of her inexpiable
wrongs.</p>

<p class="c004">When she entered the poplar road, the faithful were just
repairing to church.</p>

<p class="c004">It was a singularly bright day for the season. The sun
was just in the east; the thin surfaces which the night had
frozen on the snows had not yet been melted by the thaw.
From the thatches there hung strings as of glittering crystal
beads; the waters, frozen in the roads and ditches, gleamed
like so many mirrors, and the frosted trees sparkled in the
sun. In the pure blue sky, there were suspended a multitude
of tiny milk-white clouds, that floated in the light like a
flock of sheep playing in a great field full of azure flax-blossoms.
The air was pure, cold, and so bracing that inhaling
it was a pleasure. The whole country-side looked
gay, the pools glistened; the snows shone with glassy golden
reflection; the children were frisking and sliding about with
joyous cries; an old man here and there, propped against
a wall, basked in the bright warm rays; even the dogs, as
they chased the crows come to pick up food, barked with a
merry bark.</p>

<p class="c004">But, on entering the church, Hanka passed immediately
into an atmosphere of deep, cold, religious silence. A low
mass was just being read at the high altar; and the people,
devoutly attentive and lost in fervent prayer, formed a dense
<span class="pageno" id="Page_239">239</span>crowd in the nave, upon which long streams of light were
pouring down.</p>

<p class="c004">Hanka cared little to mix with the crowd then. She went
into an aisle so gloomy that it had no light at all, save a
few ice-cold streaks; for she desired to be alone with her
own soul and with God. Down she knelt before a side-altar
consecrated to the Assumption and, kissing the pavement,
stretched out her arms, fixed her eyes on the sweet
face of the “Mother of Mercy,” and was soon absorbed in
prayer.</p>

<p class="c004">And now at last, at the holy feet of her, the “Comforter
of the Afflicted,” she burst out into complaints, laying bare
all the wounds of her soul with the deepest humility and
the most boundless trust, and confessing all her sins from
the bottom of her heart. Before our Lady—the Mother of
the Polish Nation—she truly repented of all her transgressions.
For lo! she had sinned, since she had been punished
by the Lord Jesus!</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, I have been unkind to my neighbours, I have set
myself above them, quarrelled sometimes, and not been
cleanly, and have loved good cheer, been lazy in working
and slothful in God’s service: I have sinned.” Such was
the fervent cry of her soul, bleeding with contrition, and
she prayed most earnestly that God might forgive Antek’s
most grievous sins. Oh, how, and with what ardour, did
she beg for mercy! Even as a fowl which, about to be
killed, makes a frantic dash to the window beats at the
panes, and pipes in a mournful voice, begging for its poor
life!</p>

<p class="c004">Her whole frame shook with weeping; and from out of
her soul, as from a bleeding wound, there poured a stream
of prayers; and her tears, like bloodstained pearls, trickled
down and watered the icy pavement.</p>

<p class="c004">Mass was over; and the whole congregation, deeply contrite,
went forward to the altar railings, there to receive with
bended heads the ashes with which the priest, uttering aloud
a penitential prayer, crossed their brows as they knelt.</p>

<p class="c004">Without awaiting the close of the service, Hanka went
<span class="pageno" id="Page_240">240</span>out, greatly strengthened, and full of trust in God’s help.</p>

<p class="c004">With head erect, she replied to all who greeted her, and—bold
and brave at last—met many a curious eye as she
went by. But it was not without a quiver of emotion that
she at length reached Boryna’s enclosure.</p>

<p class="c004">Lord! how very long it was since she had been within!
And yet, how many a time had she, sorrowfully and from
afar, approached to have a glimpse of it! Now she could
view all the place—cabin, outhouses, hedges, trees covered
with hoarfrost—with eyes as full of affectionate remembrance
as if all that had been part and parcel of her own
being, of her life!</p>

<p class="c004">Her soul was glad and jocund within her. Scarcely had
she got to the porch, when Lapa dashed out and jumped
upon her, joyfully whining; and then Yuzka came out,
astounded, and hardly believing her senses.</p>

<p class="c004">“Hanka! Good Lord! Hanka!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, it is I: don’t you know me?—Is Father in the
house?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Surely, surely!—Ah, ye have come at last, ye have come,
Hanka!” And the little lass fell a-weeping and kissing her
hands, just as if she had been her own mother.</p>

<p class="c004">The old man, hearing her voice, came out and brought
her into the cabin himself, asked about the children and
was pained at what she had undergone. She presently became
calmer, and told him everything without concealment.
But she felt shocked at the change that he too had suffered;
for he had aged a good deal, stooped much more, and looked
faded and withered and thin. But his face still wore the
same expression as of old, and was even full of more grim
and dogged determination than before.</p>

<p class="c004">They had a long talk; and when, after an hour or so,
Hanka prepared to go home, Boryna told Yuzka to make a
large bundle of everything they could spare. It turned out
to be so large that she could not carry it by herself; so
Vitek had to take it on a toboggan. And, as she went out,
Boryna thrust several <i>zloty</i> into her hands “for salt-money,”
and said:</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_241">241</span>“Come hither more often—every day, if ye can. No one
knows what may happen to me, so pray look after the
house. And Yuzka loves you.”</p>

<p class="c004">Thereupon she went away, reflecting on his words as she
went, and paying but little heed to Vitek’s prattle. Yet
he was telling her how the Voyt and the Soltys came daily
to press Master to be reconciled to Yagna; how Master had
even been at his Reverence’s, along with Dominikova—who
had afterwards conferred with him till very late the night before—and
told her all the news he thought would interest her.</p>

<p class="c004">She found Antek still at home, repairing his boots. He
did not even look up in her direction; but, on seeing Vitek
and the pack, he said, tauntingly:</p>

<p class="c004">“Come back from begging, I see.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Beggars have to beg.”</p>

<p class="c004">But when Vitek came in, Antek, recognizing him, flew into
a passion.</p>

<p class="c004">“Blood of a dog!—I forbade you to go to Father’s!”</p>

<p class="c004">“He asked me himself—I went; he offered the things unasked—I
accepted.—Am I, are the children, to die of
hunger?—To you ’tis indifferent; but I will not have it.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Take all that back again!” he shouted. “I want nothing
from that man.”</p>

<p class="c004">“You do not: I and the little ones do!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Take it back, I say, or I’ll take it myself ... aye, and
thrust his charity down his throat to choke him! Do you
hear? I’ll throw all that stuff out of doors!”</p>

<p class="c004">“You dare to try! Lay but a finger on it, and you’ll
see!” she screamed, catching up the tiny house-mangle, ready
to defend, tooth and nail, the things given her. So dangerous
did she look, so infuriated, that he shrank back in
confusion at this unexpected resistance.</p>

<p class="c004">“He has bought you cheap,” he growled. “Very cheap.—For
a bit of bread, as one lures a dog!”</p>

<p class="c004">“You have sold us—and yourself—cheaper still: for
Yagna’s ... petticoat!” she burst out.—Antek started, as
though stabbed. And then Hanka seemed suddenly to have
gone raving mad. In a torrent of words she overwhelmed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_242">242</span>him with every wrong he had ever done to her, and with
a host of remembrances and grievances she had never yet
spoken of; unsparingly, passing over not one single fault or
unkindness; beating him so unmercifully with the flail of
her speech that, if she could, she would have beaten him
to death on the spot.</p>

<p class="c004">He stood aghast at her mad rage; and he felt something,
too, that was tearing at his heart. With bowed head he
listened, dismayed, and a bitter sense of shame burned his
soul; then he snatched up his cap and fled out of the hut.</p>

<p class="c004">It was long ere he could make out what strange transformation
had come over her. As a dog spurned from the
door, he ran away, never thinking where he went, to wander
about aimlessly, as indeed was his daily custom.</p>

<p class="c004">For since that terrible hour of the conflagration, a fearful
thing had come into being within him: he was, so to
speak, a prey to secret insanity. He no longer went to his
work, although the miller had several times sent for him;
he did nothing but wander about the country-side, or sit
drinking in the tavern, continually revolving in his mind
thoughts of bloody vengeance, and his soul was full of nothing
else.</p>

<p class="c004">He was even indifferent to the suspicions of arson which
sullied his name.</p>

<p class="c004">“Let anyone dare to utter them to my face ... let him
but dare!” he had cried to Matthew in the tavern, loud
enough for all present to hear.</p>

<p class="c004">The heifer which remained to him he had sold to a Jew,
and drunk the price of it with his associates; for he had now
for pot-companions all the riff-raff in Lipka; such vile fellows
as, for instance, Bartek Koziol, or Philip (from over
the water), Francis, the miller’s man, or those, the lowest
of all, the jail-birds, Gulbasowa’s sons—men always ready
for any act of debauchery, always prowling like wolves
about the country-side, seeking what they could snap up and
barter to the Jew for a few drams. But he cared little
what they were: they kept him company, and fawned upon
<span class="pageno" id="Page_243">243</span>him as spaniels fawn on their masters. He did indeed give
one or another a thrashing now and then; but he willingly
stood them drinks and protected them against other folk.</p>

<p class="c004">The gang shortly committed so many lawless acts and
breaches of the peace that complaints were made every day
to the Voyt, and even to his Reverence.</p>

<p class="c004">Matthew cautioned him, but unavailingly. Vainly, too,
had Klemba, out of pure kindliness, besought him to stop
in time, and not ruin his life for ever. He listened to no
one, did more and more desperate deeds, drank yet harder,
and had become the dread of the whole village.</p>

<p class="c004">In short, he was rolling swiftly to his destruction down
a precipitous hill. All Lipka had their eyes upon him—eyes
of suspicion and apprehension. As to the fire, indeed,
they were divided in opinion; but they saw with their own
eyes the deeds he undoubtedly did, and their animosity increased
daily; besides, the smith was always inciting them
against him. Even his former friends soon began to hold
aloof from him; but to Antek, blinded by the lust of revenge,
that was all one.</p>

<p class="c004">And over and above this, as if to spite all men, he continued
his relations with Yagna. Was it love that attracted
him? or what was it? God knows: but they met in Dominikova’s
barn: without her knowledge, indeed, but willingly
abetted by Simon, who hoped that Antek would help him
to get Nastka for his wife.</p>

<p class="c004">Those meetings were unwillingly consented to by Yagna.
With the wales of her husband’s castigation still fresh upon
her, she had no mind for love-making; but she feared Antek,
who had sent her word that, unless she came at every
call of his, he would go to her hut, and in broad daylight
and in public administer a chastisement yet more severe
than Boryna’s had been!</p>

<p class="c004">As the saying is: “For the authors of their fall, sinners
have no love at all”: but she feared his threat, and was
forced to go.</p>

<p class="c004">This state of things, however, did not last long. The
<span class="pageno" id="Page_244">244</span>second day of Lent, Simon came in haste to the tavern and,
taking Antek aside, told him that Yagna had just been reconciled
to her goodman and returned to his cabin.</p>

<p class="c004">If a club had crashed down on his skull, it would not
have stunned him more than this news. She had met him
the very day before, and had said no word of this.</p>

<p class="c004">“So! she left me in the dark!” he thought, and hurried
away to Boryna’s as soon as evening had fallen.</p>

<p class="c004">He prowled for a long time about his father’s premises,
looking for her and waiting by the stile; but she was not to
be seen. This irritated him so violently that he boldly
pulled up a stake and entered the enclosure, ready to proceed
to any extremity—even to go into the hut; in fact,
he was in the passage, with his hand on the latch ... when
an unknown feeling of dread drove him from the door!
His father’s face had come before him with such sudden
vividness that he started back in terror from that mental
image.</p>

<p class="c004">What it was that had come over him, and why he had
quailed now again, just as on that former night beside the
pond, he was all his life unable to understand.</p>

<p class="c004">On the following days too, he got no sight of her, although
he watched by the stile, and lurked about there for
whole evenings together, like a wolf.</p>

<p class="c004">Sunday come round, and he waited for a long while in
front of the church: but she did not appear.</p>

<p class="c004">The thought struck him that he might perhaps meet her
at Vespers, and get speech with her somehow. So he went.</p>

<p class="c004">He was rather late. Evensong had already begun. The
church was full, and so dark that the daylight, now dying,
only lit the topmost vaults. A few tiny rushlights had been
kindled here and there, to read by; in front of the high
altar, brilliantly illuminated, the people were thronging close.
He elbowed his way as far as the sanctuary railings, and
looked furtively round for Yagna; but she was nowhere in
sight. Instead, he caught many a look of curiosity directed
towards himself.</p>

<p class="c004">They were chanting the “Bitter Lamentations,” for it was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_245">245</span>the first Sunday in Lent. The priest was sitting, surpliced
and book in hand, beside the altar, and more than once cast
a stern look in his direction.</p>

<p class="c004">The organ was pealing forth soul-stirring music, and the
whole congregation lifted up their voices in unison. Now
and then the chant was interrupted, the music stopped playing,
and from high above in the organ-loft a broken voice
was heard, reading out a meditation on the Passion of our
Lord.</p>

<p class="c004">But Antek heard nothing now. Little by little, he had
forgotten where he was and why he had come; the chants
had sunk into his soul, and unstrung him strangely. A
sense of numbness overpowered him, together with a feeling
of deep quiet, as though he had escaped and flown somewhere
very far away—into some region full of light. And
whenever he came to himself and opened his eyes, he met
the eyes of the priest, always fixed on him; and that look
was so piercing that Antek turned away his heavy drowsy
head, and began to fall once more into his torpor. Suddenly
he woke up at the sound of a well-known chant:</p>

<div class="lg-container-l c012">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“Behold! the Lord of heaven hangs crucified:</div>
      <div class="line">Weep for thy sins, O man! for them He died!”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c004">As if issuing from one single colossal throat, the chant—an
immense wave of sound—came bursting forth with such
vehement lamentation, so clamorous a wail, that the very
walls vibrated to that cry!</p>

<p class="c004">Long did they sing thus and the walls echoed with
dolorous reverberations, and sighs, and earnest sobbing
prayers.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek no longer felt drowsy, but a heavy resistless sense
of sorrow surged over his soul with such potency that it
was all he could do to restrain the tears which started to
his eyes; and he was about to leave the church, when the
organ again ceased playing, and the priest, standing in front
of the altar, began to speak.</p>

<p class="c004">The people were pressing forward in so densely packed a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_246">246</span>crowd that it was now impossible to get away, and Antek
was pushed up against the railing. A great hush fell upon
all; every word the priest said was distinctly audible. He
spoke first of our Lord’s Passion, and then passed on to inveigh
against sin, waving his arms with threatening gestures,
from time to time looking hard at Antek, who stood right
in front of him, though somewhat lower, spellbound by the
priest’s burning glances, and unable to take his eyes off him.</p>

<p class="c004">In the audience there was presently a noise of weeping
and sighing, the holy Name of Jesus was invoked, and even
groans were heard. Meanwhile the priest spoke ever louder
and with greater sternness; he seemed to them to have waxed
somehow taller; lightnings shot from his eyes, and he lifted
up his hands, and his words fell like stones hurled from
them, and, like red-hot irons, they burnt into the hearts.
He spoke of their wickedness and manifold transgressions;
of the hardened sinners who lived amongst them; of their
forgetfulness of God’s commandments, their eternal quarrels
and fights and drunken bouts. He exhorted them with great
zeal, making them tremble in themselves, so that all hearts
were melted with sorrow; tears fell like dew, and there was
a low ripple of weeping, and sighs of contrition arose.—Then
the priest suddenly bent forward towards Antek, and
with a mighty voice cried out against unnatural sons, who
burned down the homes of their own fathers; and against
seducers and all such men of iniquity, whom (he said)
neither the everlasting fires nor the judgments of men would
fail to punish.</p>

<p class="c004">All the congregation were struck with awe and held their
breath. Every eye was cast upon Antek like a fiery dart.
He, white as a sheet, and scarcely able to breathe, stood
stiffly upright, the words smiting him as if the church were
falling about his ears. He looked round, as though to find
help; but there was now an empty space round him, lined
only by menacing or terrified faces. The folk shrank from
him, as from one stricken with the plague.—And now the
priest cried aloud, calling him to repentance, beseeching,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_247">247</span>imploring, adjuring him. Finally, turning again to the people,
he exhorted them with outstretched arms to beware of
a man so infamous, to protect themselves against him, to
refuse him fire, water, food—aye, and not to let him so much
as darken their doors. “For such a one would taint you
all; ye would all grow foul at his touch; and, should he
not mend his ways, atone for his misdeeds and do penance,
then ought ye to pluck him out as ye weed stinging nettles,
and cast him forth to his perdition!”</p>

<p class="c004">At those words, Antek suddenly turned round; the people
fell away from him right and left, and he passed out by
the lane thus made, while the priest’s voice followed, smiting
him as with a scourge that drew blood at each stroke.</p>

<p class="c004">A wild cry of despair echoed at that moment through the
church; but Antek did not hear it. He walked out as fast
as he could, fearing lest he should fall dead with agony—fearing
those eyes that glowed, fearing that awful voice.</p>

<p class="c004">He went out into the highway and on to the poplar road,
leading to the woods. From time to time, he paused affrighted:
he still could hear that voice, which rang in his
ears like a knell.</p>

<p class="c004">It was a cold and windy night. The poplars were rocking
noisily; sometimes a bough struck him across the face;
and when the gale fell, there came a cold thin March rain
that drizzled in his eyes. But Antek went on his way unheeding,
bewildered, amazed, filled with unspeakable awe.</p>

<p class="c004">“Things are now at their worst!” he muttered at last,
coming to a standstill. “Yes, he was right! he was right!”</p>

<p class="c004">“O Jesus! My Jesus!” he shrieked, seizing his head in
his hands with a sudden clutch. At that instant he had
seen as in a flash all the horror of his sins, and was torn
with an unearthly sense of humiliation.</p>

<p class="c004">He sat for a long time brooding under a tree, gazing into
the night and listening to the low, tremulous, eerie music
of the waving trees.</p>

<p class="c004">A convulsion of rage and hatred seized him. “It is all
through that man—that man!” he exclaimed, his former
<span class="pageno" id="Page_248">248</span>resentment springing up anew, and all those cravings for
revenge spreading over his mind again, dark as the clouds
that overspread the sky.</p>

<p class="c004">“Never will I forgive him! no, never!” he bellowed, his
recklessness returning. And he at once started up, to go
back to the village.</p>

<p class="c004">The church was now locked; the cabin-windows shone
bright. As he went by, he passed several knots of people,
who, in spite of the rain, stood engaged in eager talk.</p>

<p class="c004">On passing the tavern, he looked in at the window, saw
there was plenty of company inside, and went in boldly,
as if there had been nothing amiss. But when he approached
the largest group with greetings, only one or two
shook hands with him; the others hastily withdrew and left
the place.</p>

<p class="c004">In a minute, he was all but alone in the tavern. Besides
the Jew behind the bar, there was only a <i>Dziad</i> sitting by
the fire.</p>

<p class="c004">He had driven them all away! It was a bitter pill, but
he swallowed it, and ordered some vodka; then, laying down
the glass untouched, he rushed out.</p>

<p class="c004">He strayed along the banks of the pond, eyeing with a
vacant stare the long fiery streaks which, from the lighted
windows, swept over the wet snow and glistened on the
water with which the ice was now covered.</p>

<p class="c004">Gentler thoughts came to him. His heart felt unspeakably
heavy: he was so terribly alone, so much in want of
human converse, of some fireside to sit by, that he went
straight to Ploshka’s cabin, the first along his way.</p>

<p class="c004">A large assembly was there; but, when he entered, they
all started to their feet in dismay. Even Staho, who was
there too, could not find a word to say to him.</p>

<p class="c004">He muttered: “Ye stare at me as if I were a murderer!”
and went out to the next hut, which was Balcerek’s.</p>

<p class="c004">Here they received him with the utmost frigidity, mumbling
some inarticulate words in response to his greeting,
and not even asking him to be seated.</p>

<p class="c004">He looked in at several huts in this way, and with the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_249">249</span>same result. As a last resource, and to leave no drop of
pain and humiliation untasted, he went to see Matthew.
But the man was not in; and his mother at once, and from
the very threshold, stormed at him and drove him out like
a dog.</p>

<p class="c004">He answered not a word, nor did he indeed feel any resentment
now; for the time, all bitterness had left him. He
plodded on slowly through the darkness, stopping at times
to look around him on the village, bright with many a
lighted window, at which, and at the lowly huts that rose on
every side, he gazed in bewilderment, as though he had
never seen them before. In those hedgerows, those orchards,
those lights, resided a strange spell, which somehow chained
him to the spot. It was incomprehensible, but he experienced
a resistless power that had seized hold of him and
bound him to the land—which made him bow his neck to the
yoke, and filled him with an inexplicable dread.</p>

<p class="c004">He eyed those lamplit windows, and terror possessed his
soul. They were all watching him, he thought; they were
peering at him, following him, to fetter and enslave him
with adamantine chains. He was no longer able to flee, nor
to move, nor to cry out. He leaned back against a tree;
and there, crushed with anguish, he listened ... and heard—from
all the homesteads, the shadows around them, the
fields, nay, even the heavens themselves—those same words
of pitiless condemnation, now ratified by the whole population
of Lipka!</p>

<p class="c004">“It is just! it is just!” he said, huskily, humbled to the
dust, and from the inmost depths of his miserable heart,
struck with mortal fear of that almighty Power—the Voice
of the Many.</p>

<p class="c004">By degrees all the lights went out, and the village fell
asleep. It drizzled still, and drops pattered from the drooping
trees. Occasionally a dog would utter a short bark, in
the midst of the stillness that reigned everywhere. Then
Antek, returning to complete consciousness, suddenly started
to his feet.</p>

<p class="c004">“Yes, he spoke justly; he said the truth as it was in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_250">250</span>him. But I will not let the other go scot-free—not I!
Blood of a dog! whatever happens, he shall pay!”</p>

<p class="c004">His words were a frenzied shriek, and he shook his fist
at Lipka and at the whole world.</p>

<p class="c004">Settling his cap on his head, he made again for the
tavern.</p>
<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_251">251</span>
  <!--se:split--><h2 class="c007">CHAPTER XIII</h2>
</div>
<p class="c010">Spring was drawing nigh. March had come, with its
own most foul weather—quagmiry, chilly, foggy; with
its daily falls of sleet, its daily thick, shaggy, dingy
mists, creeping along over the fields, and quenching all light
so thoroughly that the whole day, from grey dawn to dusky
twilight, was equally dark. Or, if at rare intervals the sun
peered, half drowned, out of those sombre abysses, it was
but for the space of one Ave Maria; and ere one’s soul could
rejoice in the splendour, one’s body in the warmth of it,
down came the dusk once more upon the world, down swept
the winds afresh, and the “fog and filthy air” resumed their
reign.</p>

<p class="c004">Folk were sorely troubled at this, for they had lived in
hope that, after a week or two, spring would get the upper
hand and make amends for all they had suffered. And,
meantime, the roofs let the rain in, the water came through
walls and windows, and poured on every side. In despair
they saw it creep in from the fields, fill all the ditches even
to brimming over, make the roads gleam and glitter like
waterways, come round through the hedgerows, and stand
about the farm-yards in deep miry pools. And as the snow
continued to melt and the rain to fall, the thawed ground
soon softened to such a degree that in many farm-yards there
were mud-pits without number at noontide, and folk had to
lay boards outside the huts, or bridge the approaches with
trusses of straw.</p>

<p class="c004">Nor were the nights less unbearable, with their downpours
and their black darkness—so thick that one might fancy
light had gone out for ever. Few lit fires in the evening:
weary of the wretched weather, all went to bed at nightfall—and
Lipka was in palpable obscurity. True, in a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_252">252</span>few huts they assembled to spin: there the windows gleamed,
and the low chant of the “Lamentations” quavered, together
with other mournful hymns on the sufferings of Jesus.
They were accompanied by the blasts, the pattering rain,
and the trees lashing one against the other through the
enclosures.</p>

<p class="c004">No wonder if Lipka was lost in this sea of slush: the huts
were so lowly, they scarce rose out of the ground where they
crouched, dank, dingy, wretched to look upon. And, as to
the lands and gardens and roads and sky, there was so much
water everywhere that no one could distinguish anything
from anything else.</p>

<p class="c004">The weather was bleak, besides; it chilled the very bones,
and few cared to meet it. The blasts blew, the rain pattered,
the trees rocked in a solitude; for all the voices heard,
Lipka might as well have been a place of the dead. Only
the cattle lowed sometimes over their empty mangers; or
cocks fell a-crowing; or ganders, parted from their brooding
mates, would cry aloud and indignantly.</p>

<p class="c004">The days were longer; but this only made the time hang
more heavily on people’s hands. No one had any work to
do, except the few who laboured at the sawmill or carried
timber for the miller from the forest. The others lounged
about the cabins, sitting at their neighbours’ till the day
dragged on to its close. Some of the older men took to
getting ploughs, or harrows, or other such implements, ready
for spring; but the work went on slowly and lifelessly, all
being equally exasperated by the foul weather. And
troubled at heart, besides; for the lands sown in autumn
were in a pitiful state; and—especially in the low-lying
fields—parts of the crops were frozen. Some of the farmers,
too, were getting to the end of their provender, and
famine was looking in at the byres. Others had found that
all their stock of potatoes was frost-nipped. Others, again,
had their huts full of sick folk; and for many the days
of starvation which often usher in the spring seemed at
hand.</p>

<p class="c004">So in more than one cabin warm meals were served only
<span class="pageno" id="Page_253">253</span>once a day; and people went to the miller in ever-increasing
numbers to borrow a few bushels of flour that they were
to pay for later in work. He was, indeed, a confounded
extortioner; but no one had either ready money, or things
to sell in town. Others went whining to Yankel, begging
him to lend them a screw of salt, or a quart of groats,
or a loaf of bread, putting their pride in their pockets; for,
as the proverb runs: “When it comes to the worst, Goodman
Belly is first.”</p>

<p class="c004">So many of the folk were in want, and there was no work
for them to do! The peasant-farmers themselves had none
to give. The Squire was resolved not to let one man of
Lipka earn a kopek in his forest, and remained unmoved
even by the prayers of a large deputation. And thus, both
amongst the <i>Komorniki</i> and the poorer peasant landowners,
the misery became so great that many a one thanked
God that he still had potatoes, and salt to season them with—though
with bitter tears into the bargain!</p>

<p class="c004">Therefore there was now much heart-burning in the village,
with quarrelling and conflicts as well. People were
restless, uncertain of the morrow, and sorely agitated, everyone
seeking to satisfy the greed which gnawed at his heart
by snatching whatever he could from his neighbour.</p>

<p class="c004">Over and above all this, the village was afflicted with
many sicknesses, as is often the case just before spring;
for at that time noxious vapours rise up from the thawing
ground. Smallpox swooped down first, like a hawk on
a brood of goslings, slaying the little ones. Both the youngest
children of the Voyt were taken, in spite of the doctors
whom he called in. Then the grown-ups were assailed by
many diseases, and to such an extent that in every other
cabin someone lay moaning, in expectation of the grave and
trusting to the mercy of God. Dominikova was overcharged
with patients.—And, just then, the cows’ time for
calving came round, and many a woman was brought to
bed: so that the distress and confusion in the village became
very great.</p>

<p class="c004">People were accordingly looking forward to spring with
<span class="pageno" id="Page_254">254</span>ever more and more impatience. All were sure that, as
soon as the snows had melted, and the lands were thawed
and dry, and the sun shone bright so that they could go out
to plough, all their trouble and distress would be over at
last.</p>

<p class="c004">But that year they remarked that the spring was slower
to come than usual. The rain never ceased, the ground
thawed very slowly; and besides—a bad sign, foreboding a
long winter!—even now, the kine had not begun to shed
their hair.</p>

<p class="c004">Therefore, whenever there came a single hour of dry
weather and radiant sun, the villagers came swarming out
of their huts and gazed up into the sky and wondered
whether this change would last at all. The old folk basked
in the bright beams to warm their tottering limbs, and
all the little ones ran out along the roads in noisy crowds,
like colts let into the meadows for the first time in spring.</p>

<p class="c004">How merry and jocund and full of glee they all were
then!</p>

<p class="c004">The whole land lay in the genial warmth, and all the
waters were bathed in light; the ditches seemed brimful
of molten sun; the ice on the pond, washed by the rains,
looked like a huge dish of blackened tinware; the trees
sparkled with yet undried dew; the furrow-streaked fields
spread out, quiet and dark of hue, but already inhaling
the warmth, and swollen with the springtide and the
sparkling murmurous waters. The snows, too, still unmelted
here and there, shone with crude whiteness, like linen
laid out to bleach: the azure sky revealed its depths, hitherto
veiled in mists, and hidden under a web of gossamer, as it
were; now the eyes could sound its infinite blue fields, or
glance over to the dark horizon and the wavy outline of the
woods.</p>

<p class="c004">And the world around was panting with joy; for such
sweet spring odours were wafted all about them that a cry
of happiness gushed from the hearts of men, and their souls
aspired to soar upwards in the sunlight, like those birds
<span class="pageno" id="Page_255">255</span>they saw coming from somewhere in the far-away east and
floating in the crystal air. Every man came out of doors
with delight, and took pleasure in talking, even with one
who was no friend to him.</p>

<p class="c004">For at that moment all bickerings were done with, all
quarrels appeased: everyone felt full of loving-kindness towards
everyone. Cries of gladness echoed from hut to hut,
and trilled through the balmy air.</p>

<p class="c004">Then did they throw the cabin-doors wide open, and
remove the windows from their clamped fastenings to let
in the air; the women took their spinning-gear outside, and
even the babes were carried out in their cradles to get some
sunlight. From the byres, again and again, there floated
the anxious lowing of the kine; horses neighed, eager to
quit their stables; cocks crowed in the hedges, and dogs,
barking wildly, ran about like mad, and splashed with the
children in the mud.</p>

<p class="c004">Their elders, staying within the enclosures, blinked in
the dazzling sunbeams, and looked with delight at the
country round, all bathed in splendour. Women chatted
together over their orchard-fences, and their voices resounded
afar. They told how someone had heard the song
of a lark, how wagtails had been seen on the poplar road—and
then another caught sight of a string of wild geese far
up in the sky, and half the village ran out to look at them—and
a third affirmed that storks had already alighted on
the flats by the mill. This was doubted, for March had
not yet begun its third week. And then a lad brought in
the first spray of blossoms, and ran with it round to every
hut, where they gloated over the pale clusters in deep admiration,
as over some most sacred thing.</p>

<p class="c004">So that illusory spell of warmth had made them all believe
that spring was at their gates, and that presently they
would be ploughing their fields. Their dismay and mortification
were therefore all the more intense, when they saw
the sky suddenly clouded over, the sun quite hidden from
sight, all the brightness faded, the land darkened once more,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_256">256</span>and a thin rain beginning to fall! With the coming of
night, the rain was followed by snow; and very shortly the
village and its environs were whitened over anew.</p>

<p class="c004">Things were again in their former state; and the subsequent
days of slush and mire and wet made them feel almost
as though the past hours of sunshine had been only a
bright dream.</p>

<p class="c004">Whilst folks were spending their days in such hopes and
desires, and joys so soon doomed to disappointment, it was
quite natural that Antek’s conduct, the domestic troubles of
Boryna, and all the rest—even to the deaths which took
place—should fall into forgetfulness, like a stone flung into
a deep lake: every man had enough worries of his own,
and scarcely knew how to bear them.</p>

<p class="c004">But the days rolled on, neither stopping nor hurrying,
without end, without commencement, as the waves of a great
sea: hardly had they opened their eyes and looked round,
and taken note of a few things (how few!), when twilight
was there again, and night, and then another day dawned
with its own fresh troubles. And all was repeated once
more, that the will of God might be accomplished upon
earth!</p>

<p class="c004">One day—it was about Mid-Lent—the weather was at
its very worst. True, only a drizzle of rain fell; but the
worn-out folk were in a state of extreme and bitter restlessness,
moving to and fro as men possessed, looking forth
sullenly at their world covered with clouds so louring that,
as they swept bellying past, they brushed the tree-tops.
All was sad, cold, darksome, dripping with wet, and wringing
every heart with uncontrollable aversion. Nobody
quarrelled with anyone that day; no one cared for anything
at all: everyone longed for some quiet nook where
he could lie down and think of nothing.</p>

<p class="c004">The whole day had been gloomy, as the eyes of a sick
man who wakes, glances round, and falls again to the darkness
of lethargy. Scarcely had the noonday Angelus rung,
when a sullen rain-bearing wind rose and smote upon the
dark-hued shadowy cabins.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_257">257</span>No one was out of doors. The gusts, with their quick
flaws of rain, swept shrieking over the mire, churning it
up, and pelting the shaken trees and the smirched walls as
with handfuls of corn flung down: while the pond was
wrestling with the broken ice-pack, pounding and tossing on
its shores, with a growling gurgling rumble.</p>

<p class="c004">But on the evening of that same day, a rumour flew
through the village that the Squire was hewing down the
peasants’ part of the forest!</p>

<p class="c004">At first, no one would believe it. The thing had not been
attempted till then: how could it be done now, when March
was half over, the ground a quagmire, and the trees swelling
with sap?</p>

<p class="c004">True, men were at work in the forest; but, as all knew, it
was quite another sort of work.</p>

<p class="c004">And then the Squire, no matter what he was called, had
never been called a fool by anyone.</p>

<p class="c004">Could the man, then, be such a fool as to try floating
the timber down ... in March?</p>

<p class="c004">All the same, the village was upset with this report, and
doors banged, and mud was waded through, and the news
travelled from cabin to cabin. They stood talking of it
upon the highway, they went to think it over in the tavern
... and also to question the Jew on the matter. But the
crafty “yellow one” swore he knew nothing whatever about
it. A great outcry was made, evil words were spoken, the
women lamented, and public indignation, fury, excitement
and fear continued to increase.</p>

<p class="c004">Finally, old Klemba decided to get the news verified, and
sent two of his sons on horseback to the forest as scouts,
in spite of the bad weather.</p>

<p class="c004">It was long ere they returned. From every hut, someone
went out to watch the forest in the direction they had
taken. But twilight had deepened into darkness, and they
were not yet back. The village was full of a stillness, ominous
of passions all the more dangerous because thus reined
in. Every soul was now smouldering with the fiercest animosity;
for, though no one quite believed this disastrous
<span class="pageno" id="Page_258">258</span>rumour to be true, they all expected it might be confirmed;
and many were the curses and slammings of doors,
as one after another went to see if the boys were returning.</p>

<p class="c004">Kozlova bustled about everywhere, and upheld the truth
of the rumour to anyone that would listen to her talk,
swearing by all the saints that she had with her own eyes
seen a good many acres of peasants’ forest hewn down already.
She appealed to Yagustynka, who had lately been
very much hand-in-glove with her, and of course confirmed
her words, as rejoicing in every broil and disturbance, the
hag! And she then, having picked up some more items of
gossip at various places, went to carry them to Boryna’s.</p>

<p class="c004">The lamp was just lit in the work-room; Yuzka was peeling
potatoes, Vitek assisting her; Yagna was busied in
household duties. Somewhat later, Boryna came in, and old
Yagustynka told him of all she had heard, with very
many additions. He did not say one word to her in reply,
but, turning to Yagna, “Take a spade,” he said, “and go
to help Pete; the water must be let out of the orchard, or
it will be pouring into the potato-pits.—Off with you instantly,
I say!” he cried.</p>

<p class="c004">Yagna mumbled some objections; but he gave her such a
look that she had to run out directly; he following her
steps to overlook the work, and soon audible, storming
about the byre, the stable and the potato-pits.</p>

<p class="c004">“Is the old man always so cantankerous?” Yagustynka
queried, raking up the fire.</p>

<p class="c004">“He is,” Yuzka said, as she listened to his voice in fear.</p>

<p class="c004">It was the truth. Since he had taken back his wife—which
he had done so readily that folk wondered—he had
altered beyond recognition. Always had he been a hard
man, and a stubborn; but now he had turned into stone.
Yes, he had taken her back, and without one word of
reproach; only now she was for him simply a serving-wench—nothing
more. She had tried endearments upon him:
they had failed. Nor did her charms avail her any more
than peevishness, or those fits of petulance and tantrums,
the weapons of women against men. To them he paid no
<span class="pageno" id="Page_259">259</span>heed whatever, and treated her as a stranger, and no
wedded wife: so much so, that he no longer troubled what
she did, though perfectly aware that she still met Antek.</p>

<p class="c004">He did not even watch over her. A few days after the
“reconciliation,” he had driven to town, returning only the
next day; and folk whispered that he had been at the
notary’s and drawn some document or other; some even
surmising that he had revoked his deed of gift in Yagna’s
favour. As a matter of fact, none but Hanka knew the
truth, and she kept it dark. She was now in such favour
with her father-in-law that he confided everything he did
to her. She saw him nearly every day, and the children
almost made their home there, often sleeping with their
grandfather, who loved them dearly.</p>

<p class="c004">Perhaps as a consequence of this change, Boryna’s health
seemed to be quite restored. He stooped no longer, as he
had done of late; his glance was again as proud as of old.
But now he had become so choleric besides, that he would
fly out on the slightest provocation. His hand was heavy
on everybody, and when he laid it on anyone, that one must
bend even to the ground; and all things be done according
to his will.</p>

<p class="c004">Not that he treated people unjustly; but gentleness was
not in his line any more. He had taken the reins into his
own hands, and never let them go for an instant. He kept
a watchful eye on the stores, and yet more on his pocket, doling
out everything in person, and looking carefully to prevent
all waste. Harsh to everyone at home, he was especially
so to Yagna, never expressed himself as being
pleased with her, and drove her to work as they drive a lazy
horse. No day passed without its squabble; often, very
often, his leather girdle came into play, or even something
still harder; for Yagna was possessed by a devil of contradiction,
and did her best to spite him.</p>

<p class="c004">Obey him she did, for she could not help it; and how
could she resist? “Who eats her husband’s bread must do
her husband’s will.” But for one sharp word of his she
gave him ten. The cabin was really turned into a hell; it
<span class="pageno" id="Page_260">260</span>seemed as if they both enjoyed making it so, each striving to
the uttermost, and eager to put the other down, both equally
headstrong and unyielding.</p>

<p class="c004">Dominikova quite unavailingly attempted to come between
them and effect a true reconciliation. It was out of
the question: the feelings of wrongs, of cruel treatment,
and of mutual hatred rankled too deep within their hearts.</p>

<p class="c004">All Boryna’s fondness had gone where last year’s springtide
was. He had only the lively remembrance of her betrayal,
undying humiliation, and absolutely implacable
malice. Yagna’s mind, too, was very greatly changed. She
felt unspeakably miserable; but she had not yet admitted
that she was to blame! Her punishment was harder for
her than it would have been for others, because she was
more affectionate of heart, had been more delicately brought
up, and was naturally daintier than most women.</p>

<p class="c004">And she suffered, Lord! how terribly!</p>

<p class="c004">True, she employed every means to vex her husband,
never gave way unless under compulsion, and defended herself
tooth and nail; but daily the yoke grew heavier and
heavier; it galled her to the quick, and there was no escape.
Many a time she had wanted to return to her mother, but
the latter was so strongly opposed to such a step that she
threatened to send her back to her husband by force, at
the end of a rope!</p>

<p class="c004">What, then, was she to do? She could not take up the
attitude so many women in her position take, willingly supporting
hell at home for pleasure with sweethearts, full and
free: a fight every day, and a reconciliation when night
comes round.</p>

<p class="c004">No, that would have been too loathsome to her. Yet
her present state was growing steadily more and more insupportable,
and her craving for something new—she knew
not what—increased as steadily.</p>

<p class="c004">She gave Boryna spite for spite. Nevertheless, she lived
in continual terror, oppressed by such a sense of injustice
and such bitter sorrow that she often wept for whole nights,
watering her pillow with tears; while by day those perpetual
<span class="pageno" id="Page_261">261</span>brawls and conflicts were not infrequently so hateful
to her that she only dreamed of fleeing away somewhither—far,
far away!</p>

<p class="c004">Somewhither! Aye, but whither?</p>

<p class="c004">Yes, the world stretched wide around her; but that world—it
was such an appalling, unknown, unfathomable vagueness
that the mere thought of it frightened her to death.</p>

<p class="c004">It was this which still drew her towards Antek, though
what she felt was not so much love as terror and despair.
In that fearful night, when she had fled to her mother’s,
something within her had burst and perished, so to speak;
and now she could no longer fly to him with her whole heart,
as she had done before; no more could she run to him at
every call with joyfully beating heart. She went only from
a sense of necessity—because the cabin was dull and wearisome,
because she hated her husband—because she fancied
that her former immense love might perhaps come to life
again. In her inmost heart she felt bitter against him.
Her present wretched position, the hard life she was leading
now, her blighted reputation—all were due to him; and,
moreover, she realized the fact that he was not that which
she had adored, and she knew the fierce pangs of disenchantment
and disillusion. He had formerly seemed to her
quite another being—one whose fondness lifted her up to
heaven, whose kindness overmastered her—the sweetest,
dearest being in all the world. And now she saw he was
just the same as any other peasant. Worse, indeed; for
she was more afraid of him than even of her husband. He
frightened her by his dark moods, by his fits of desolation,
and, above all, by his reckless violence. He made her
tremble, for he was, in her eyes, wild and fierce as a forest
outlaw. Why, the priest himself had rebuked him publicly
in church; the whole village had shrank away from him, and
now pointed him out as the worst amongst them; and there
proceeded out of him such an exhalation of mortal sin that
the mere sound of his voice often made her faint with
dread: it seemed to her as though Satan dwelt in him, and
as if around him there hovered all the host of hell. At
<span class="pageno" id="Page_262">262</span>those moments she had such impressions as when his Reverence
told the people about the awful torments of the lost!</p>

<p class="c004">Not for one instant did it come home to her that she
had part in his guilt: not in the least! When she thought
of him, it was but to mourn that he had so greatly changed,
and her feelings on that score became so strong that she
cared for him ever less and less. At times, when embraced
by him, she would stiffen suddenly, as if struck dead by a
thunderbolt. She let him kiss her—for how could she resist
such a dragon of a man? Moreover, she felt young,
full-blooded, of lively temperament ... and his kisses were
so violent, they well-nigh choked her. So, in spite of all,
she would still give him her love with the mighty elemental
craving of the earth that thirsts eternally for warm rain and
sunshine; but yet her inner self was no more at his feet,
driven by that former uncontrollable impulse; she was no
more given up to that blind rapture which once upon a
time had made her feel nigh death; she was nevermore again
to be so frantically lovesick. At such times, her thoughts
would fly to the hut, to her work, to some new invention
to spite her husband; and at times she even thought: “When
will this man leave me and go away?”</p>

<p class="c004">These thoughts about him were in her mind as she was
working to keep the water out of the potato-pits. Her
work was only for the eye, and as in duty bound. Pete
toiled with a will, battling noisily with the mud and the
frozen earth; she worked that Boryna might see her. No
sooner had he left the place than she put her apron over
her head, and went cautiously round to the stile, close to
Ploshka’s barn.</p>

<p class="c004">There stood Antek.</p>

<p class="c004">“I have been waiting an hour for you,” he said reproachfully.</p>

<p class="c004">“No need to wait at all, if they want you anywhere,”
she rapped out, in no pleasant humour.</p>

<p class="c004">He caught her in a powerful grasp, and gave her a kiss.
She turned from him in disgust.</p>

<p class="c004">“Ye reek of vodka like a barrel of the same.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_263">263</span>“Are ye so dainty that my lips offend you now?”</p>

<p class="c004">“’Twas but the vodka that I had in mind,” she answered
in a gentler tone.</p>

<p class="c004">“I was here yestereve. Wherefore did ye not come?”</p>

<p class="c004">“It was cold; and besides, I am over head and ears in
work.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And you have to fondle the old man,” Antek growled,
“and tuck him up in bed!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why not?” she replied testily. “He is my husband.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yagna, do not provoke me!”</p>

<p class="c004">“If my words vex you, why come at all? Think not
that I shall weep for you!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, that means you do not care to come any more.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Not if I am to be treated as a dog, and always chid.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yagna, I have so many troubles of my own that ’tis no
great wonder if a harsh word drops from me now and then;
but I mean no offence,” he said humbly, gathering her in
his arms. She, however, remained frigid and sulky, and
only unwillingly returned his kisses. At every word she
spoke, she looked around, seeking to go home.</p>

<p class="c004">This he was not slow to note, and a nettle thrust into
his bosom would not have stung him more. He whispered,
in a tone of timid reproach:</p>

<p class="c004">“You were not always in such a hurry!”</p>

<p class="c004">“I am afraid. All the people are at home: perhaps
they will come out to look for me.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Aye, aye! But there was a time when you did not
fear to stay out all night. Oh, how you have changed!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Nonsense! What should have changed me?”</p>

<p class="c004">They were silent, each embracing the other, and sometimes
with a closer hug of sudden fondness which the memory
of past times called up; and they sought each other’s
lips with strong desire of love. But it would not do. Their
souls were drifting farther and farther apart; each harboured
bitter grudges against the other, and their wounds
rankled so that their arms instinctively fell to their sides.
They stood close, but like pillars of ice together; while words
of tenderness and passion rose to their lips (but went no
<span class="pageno" id="Page_264">264</span>farther and died unuttered), their hearts were throbbing with
sharp pain.</p>

<p class="c004">“Yagna,” he said, very low, “do you love me?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, I have already told you I cannot always come
when you call,” she answered evasively; and yet she pressed
closer to him—feeling sorry, regretful, almost ready to ask
his pardon with tears for not being able to love him any
more. He read her meaning; and her words chilled him to
the marrow, and he quivered with the pang they gave him;
resentment burst out in his heart, and with it came reproaches
and invectives which he could not choke down, and
a torrent of angry words.</p>

<p class="c004">“You are a living lie! They all have fallen away from
me, and so have you!—Love me? Aye, even as a dog that
bares its teeth to bite loves me! Yes, I have seen through
you clearly, and this I know: if folk were minded to slay
me, you’d be the first to lend a rope; if to stone me, you’d
throw the first stone!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Antek!” she cried, aghast.</p>

<p class="c004">“Be still, and hear me out!” he said sternly. “I have
spoken the truth.... And since it has come to this—well,
then, there now is naught in the world that I care for!”</p>

<p class="c004">“I must be off; they are calling me,” she stammered,
alarmed and trying to make her escape. But he seized her
arm, so that she could not move, and went on in harsh
menacing tones:</p>

<p class="c004">“This, moreover, do I tell you ... for you have not
then sense to see it for yourself: If I have fallen so low as
this, it is through you—mark well—through you!... Because
of you, the priest has rebuked me and driven me from
the church! Because of you, the whole village shrinks
from me as from one smitten with the plague.... I have
borne all ... all.... Nor did I take revenge when he—that
father of mine—gave into your hands so much of
the land that’s my own!... And now—now—<i>you</i> loathe
me! Aye, turn and writhe and twist it as you will, you lie!—You
are like the rest of them, you look on me as they
do, and fear me as if I were a robber or a slayer of men!</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_265">265</span>“What you want is another man: nay, ye would have
them all at your heels ... like dogs in the springtime—you!”
he screamed, beside himself with rage. And then he
overwhelmed her with the agonies and the venomous
thoughts he had fed on for so long, making her responsible
for all, and cursing her for his sufferings, until at last his
anger choked his voice and maddened him so, that he
rushed upon her with uplifted fists. But, stopping short
just in time, he flung her back against the wall—and strode
off!</p>

<p class="c004">“O Lord!—Antek!” she cried, realizing all at once what
he meant; and, darting after him, she put her arms round
his neck in despair. But he cast her off as one shakes off
a leech, and hastened away without a word; while she fell
to the ground, crushed and broken as if the whole universe
had fallen upon her.</p>

<p class="c004">After some time, however, she came in some sort to her
senses; but the feeling of deep injustice she had suffered
and of the wrong undergone was so keen in her that her
heart was broken with grief. She felt herself suffocating,
and wanted to cry out to the whole world that she was
blameless and had done no evil!</p>

<p class="c004">She called aloud after him, although his steps were no
longer to be heard; she lifted up her voice, but in vain.</p>

<p class="c004">Her deep distress, her heartfelt sorrow, and the dull,
crushing, terribly cruel thought that he might possibly never
return to her, together with her dead fondness that had come
to life again, all descended upon her now, with a tremendous
weight of unappeasable torment; and she wept loudly as she
walked home, caring not who might hear her.</p>

<p class="c004">In the porch she met Klemba’s son, who only just peeped
into the cabin, shouting: “They are cutting down our forest!”
and hurried on to the next hut.</p>

<p class="c004">The news spread like wildfire through Lipka, and gripped
all hearts, filling them with fierce anger. Men ran through
the village with the news, so fast that doors were opening
and slamming every instant.</p>

<p class="c004">Truly, it was a matter of life and death to the villagers,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_266">266</span>and of such evil import that they were all at once struck
dumb—or, rather, thunderstruck. They walked in fear, on
tiptoe, spoke in whispers, looking with apprehension at one
another, and listening likewise. No one cried out yet, nor
complained aloud, nor broke out into curses. The thing
was overwhelming, they all knew, and of the greatest moment—one
in which women’s babbling could do nothing.
What was required was wise determination and resolve on
the part of the whole community.</p>

<p class="c004">It was late; but no one cared to go to bed now. Some
had left their supper unfinished, the household work unaccomplished.
The roads were full of people, as were also
the cabin surroundings. Men walked about on the banks
of the pond, and their subdued whispers and mutterings were
audible in the twilight as the buzzing of angry bees.</p>

<p class="c004">And now the weather was better; the rain had stopped,
the sky had cleared up a little; flocks of clouds were moving
across the sky, and on the earth a chilly wind blew,
freezing the ground, and whitening with hoarfrost the black
skeletons of the trees. The voices, too, though not loud,
were now more distinctly heard.</p>

<p class="c004">It was at once known in the village that a number of
peasant-landowners had assembled and gone in a body to
see the Voyt.</p>

<p class="c004">There was Vinciorek, with Gregory, called the Lame One;
they saw Michael Caban, passing along with Franek Bylitsa,
cousin to Hanka’s father; and Soho too, and also Valek
the Wry-mouthed; likewise Joseph Vahnik, Casimir Sikora—even
time-honoured Ploshka. Only Boryna was seen by
none; though they said he was there, too.</p>

<p class="c004">The Voyt was not in; he had that very afternoon driven
over to head-quarters on official business; so they all assembled
at Klemba’s, followed by multitudes, women and
children among them. But they made the door fast and
let no one in. Voytek, the son of Klemba, had orders to
watch the road and tavern, lest a gendarme should by
chance show his face in the village....</p>

<p class="c004">Round the cabin, filling the farm-yard, and even the road
<span class="pageno" id="Page_267">267</span>beyond it, folk came in throngs together, all wondering what
decision those elders of theirs would come to. They were
taking counsel, and at great length—but with most secret
deliberation. Only their hoary heads were visible through
the windows, forming a semicircle around the glowing
hearth; Klemba stood on one side, holding forth about
... no one knew what: stooping now and then, and smiting
at times on the table.</p>

<p class="c004">Those outside grew every minute more impatient; and
at length Kobus and Kozlova, and more than one farm-labourer,
began to murmur and talk openly against the men
in counsel, saying that they would decide nothing of any
good for the people; that they were men who cared only
for themselves, and would readily come to terms with the
manor, letting everybody else be ruined!</p>

<p class="c004">Kobus, along with the <i>Komorniki</i> and the poorer people,
became so excited that he advised them outright to pay
no attention to what the elders would decide, but think of
themselves and take some energetic step before their rights
had been sold.</p>

<p class="c004">Matthew then appeared, and proposed that they should
go round to the tavern, where they might advise together
in freedom—not like dogs barking outside other people’s
windows.</p>

<p class="c004">The idea pleased them, and all went together to the tavern.</p>

<p class="c004">The Jew had put out the lights, but they made him open
the place again. He eyed in terror the crowd that poured
in, though they were quiet enough, occupying every bench,
table and corner of the big room, talking in groups, and
waiting for someone to speak first to the meeting.</p>

<p class="c004">Plenty were willing; but they all held back, with looks
of hesitation. And then Antek sprang forward in their
midst, and furiously denounced the manor.</p>

<p class="c004">His words impressed them certainly, but they looked
askance at the man, and eyed him with distrustful side-glances;
some even turned their backs. The memory of the
priest’s words in church, and of Antek’s wicked life, was too
fresh in their minds.—But he cared nothing for that: he
<span class="pageno" id="Page_268">268</span>was possessed by a spirit of recklessness and a savage lust of
fighting; and he wound up by crying at the top of his
voice:</p>

<p class="c004">“Boys, do not give in, do not be cravens, do not surrender
your rights! To-day it is the forest they are wresting
from you: fail to defend it, and to-morrow they will
grab at your lands, at your homesteads, at all you have!
Who will prevent them? Who will cry: ‘Hands off?’”</p>

<p class="c004">His words struck home. A low growl went through the
room; the crowd surged violently to and fro, with wild eyes
flashing fire. A hundred fists were lifted up, and a hundred
throats thundered forth: “We will! We will!” till the
tavern-walls shook to the din.</p>

<p class="c004">It was this that the leaders were waiting for. At once
Matthew, Kobus and Kozlova rushed forward, shrieking,
cursing, and ruffling up the spirits of the men so, that the
place was presently resounding with a confused noise of
war-cries, imprecations, fists smiting the tables, and the fierce
boisterous uproar of an angry mob.</p>

<p class="c004">Everyone shouted his opinion, everyone had his own plan
that all must follow.</p>

<p class="c004">The tumult increased, and threatened to degenerate into
brawling; for the men were growing quarrelsome, and
wreaked their resentment for the wrong done them on those
nearest at hand. Nor could they agree on anything to be
done; for no one there had authority enough to put himself
at their head and avenge them.</p>

<p class="c004">Little by little, they broke up into groups, with the loudest
talker amongst them laying down his opinion.</p>

<p class="c004">“Why, they have hewn down half the forest—oak-trees of
such a size that five men could not clasp them!”</p>

<p class="c004">“All this the son of Klemba has seen!”</p>

<p class="c004">“And they are going to cut down the rest, without asking
your leave!” Kozlova shrieked, pressing forward to the
bar.</p>

<p class="c004">“The manor-folk have always oppressed us.”</p>

<p class="c004">“Why not? Let them drive you, if you are silly enough
sheep to allow them.”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_269">269</span>“We must not, we must not!—Let’s all go out together,
drive off the woodmen, and take back our forest!”</p>

<p class="c004">“And slay the oppressor!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Yea, let him be slain!”</p>

<p class="c004">Fists rose into the air with defiant gestures, a deafening
shout was raised, and the whole multitude breathed hate
and revenge. When the noise had subsided, Matthew,
standing at the bar, cried to his friends:</p>

<p class="c004">“We, village folk, are pressed together as fish caught in a
net: the manor-lands, stretching out on all sides, squeeze
the life out of us.—Would ye send your cows to grass? Ye
cannot for the manor-lands.—Would ye give your horses to
eat? No, the manor-lands are there!—Ye cannot throw a
stone but it falls on the manor-lands ... and ye are taken
to the court—sentenced—fined—imprisoned!”</p>

<p class="c004">“True! true it is!” a chorus of voices assented. “If there
is anywhere a good meadow, giving an aftermath, it belongs
to the manor; the very best fields are the manor’s;
and all the woods are theirs also.”</p>

<p class="c004">“And we—the people—have barren sands to till, dried
dung to burn in our stoves ... and are waiters on Providence!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Take their woods, take their lands away from them!
We will not give up what is ours!”</p>

<p class="c004">Thus they cried out for a long time, rolling to and fro
in a waving mass, cursing and threatening furiously. All
this was tiring to the throat and heated them, so several
went to refresh themselves at the bar; and others, remembering
that they had gone without supper, called to the Jew
for bread and a herring.</p>

<p class="c004">Now when they had eaten and drunk, their excitement
lessened greatly, and they began to withdraw, without having
decided on any course of action.</p>

<p class="c004">Matthew, along with Kobus and Antek (who had stood
apart all the time, lost in certain very dark thoughts of his
own), then went over to Klemba’s and, finding the man at
home, arranged for something to be done on the morrow in
concert with him: after which they retired.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_270">270</span>It was dead of night, the lights were all out, and the
village silent, with nothing to break the stillness but the
rustling of the trees—of the frost-bedight trees, swaying,
tossing and reeling, and striking each other, like foes in a
battle. The cold was pretty severe, the hedges were clad
in a pattern of lace; but far above, to the north, no stars
were seen, and the sky was dark and sombre. So the night
crept on, long, wearisome, filling everyone with misgivings
and disquiet, with terrible dreams and nightmares, and
fevered shadowy visions.</p>

<p class="c004">But as soon as ever it began to dawn, and men to raise
their heavy slumberous heads, and open their dim
eyes, Antek ran round to the belfry and tolled the alarm-bell.</p>

<p class="c004">Ambrose and the organist would have prevented him, but
could not; he loaded them with curses, was near beating
them, and went on ringing and swinging.</p>

<p class="c004">The bell tolled slowly, dolefully, dismally; terror fell on
everyone; people on every side rushed out in dismay, half
clad, and wondering what had befallen, stood outside their
huts as if petrified. The day was breaking; the solemn and
sonorous notes still continued to be heard, while the frightened
birds winged their way to the forest, and the people,
full of evil forebodings, crossed themselves and set their
faces hard; for Matthew, Kobus and his mates were scouring
the village, beating on the fences with their staves and
crying:</p>

<p class="c004">“To the wood! To the wood! Come, all of you! The
meeting is in front of the tavern.—To the wood!”</p>

<p class="c004">They dressed in the utmost haste, some buttoning themselves
and saying their morning prayers on their way; and
all were soon at the trysting-place, where stood Klemba
and some other peasant-landowners.</p>

<p class="c004">The road, and the hedgerows, and all the yards and
premises in the neighbourhood, were presently swarming
with people. Children made a great noise, and women
screamed in the orchards, and the confusion and tumult and
uproar were such as a fire in the village might cause.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_271">271</span>“To the wood!—Let every man set out with any weapon
he has—scythe or flail or bar of wood or ax: ’tis all one!”</p>

<p class="c004">And the cry, “To the wood!” echoed all through the
place.</p>

<p class="c004">By this time it was broad day—fair, bright and frosty,
with a web of gossamer woven over the trees, and the frozen
puddles in the roads crackling underfoot and breaking with
a thin sound as of splintered glass. The bracing air smelt
keen and sharp in the nostrils, and carried afar the noise of
the tumult and shouting.</p>

<p class="c004">These, however, died away slowly, for everyone was prepared
to act; a sense of grim, stubborn, relentless strength
and assurance had hardened every mind with its harsh commanding
power.</p>

<p class="c004">The crowd, increasing, had now filled all the open space
between the tavern and the high road, and stood in serried
ranks, shoulder to shoulder.</p>

<p class="c004">Each greeted his friends in silence; everyone stood where
he could find place, looking about him patiently, or at the
elders, who now arrived with Boryna.</p>

<p class="c004">This was the first man among them all; he was their
only leader: without him, not one farmer would have moved
an inch.</p>

<p class="c004">They stood there, still, attentive, like a forest of pine-trees,
closely crowded, that listens to hear the voices within
its own depths. Now and again a word was uttered, or a
fist would shoot upwards; then their eyes would gleam, a
wave of restlessness sweep over them, a face or two flush
crimson; and then they once more stood motionless.</p>

<p class="c004">The blacksmith came in hot haste, trying to hold the
people back, and deter them from their intent by the fear of
results—ruin and chains for the whole village; and the
miller spoke to the same effect. No one listened to them.
Both were well known to be in the pay of the manor; opposition
was their business.</p>

<p class="c004">Roch, too, came and besought them with unavailing tears.</p>

<p class="c004">And, at last, the priest himself appeared, and began to
speak to them. But even to him they paid no heed. They
<span class="pageno" id="Page_272">272</span>stood unmoved; no one kissed his hand, no one even doffed
his cap to him. Someone went so far as to cry aloud:</p>

<p class="c004">“Preaching is his livelihood!”</p>

<p class="c004">And another added, sneering:</p>

<p class="c004">“Our wrongs are not to be redressed with a sermon!”</p>

<p class="c004">So ominously louring were their faces that the priest
burst into tears as he looked at them; yet he did not give
up, but conjured them, by all they held most sacred, to return
to their homes. It was useless; he was forced to be
silent and go; for Boryna had come upon the scene, and
they had eyes only for him.</p>

<p class="c004">Matthias was pale, stern and cold outwardly; but his eyes
had the glint of a wolf’s. He walked erect, sombre but decided,
nodding to his acquaintances, and looking round upon
the people. They made way for him, and he stepped on to
the pile of logs in front of the tavern. But, before he spoke,
voices in the crowd were raised:</p>

<p class="c004">“Lead us on, Matthias! lead us on!”</p>

<p class="c004">“On! on to the forest!”</p>

<p class="c004">When these cries had ceased, he bowed and, stretching
forth his arms, spoke with a mighty voice:</p>

<p class="c004">“Ye Christian people, Poles, lovers of justice, whether
husbandmen or <i>Komorniki</i>!—We have all been injured, and
in such fashion as we can neither support nor forgive! The
manor-folk are cutting down our forest ... yes, those same
manor-folk who will give no work to any man amongst us
... those manor-folk who do all they can to harry us and
drive us to ruin! Who can remember all the injuries and
grievances and ill treatment our folk have suffered from
them? We have appealed to justice: to what purpose? We
have brought complaints: how have they been dealt with?—Well,
the measure is filled: they are hewing down our
forest. Men, shall we permit that too?”</p>

<p class="c004">“Never, never! Let us drive them off, let us slay them!”
they answered him. Their faces were livid, but gleamed
darkly, as a thunder-cloud with lightning-flashes: a hundred
fists were shaken in the air, and a hundred indignant throats
were clamorous.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_273">273</span>“We have,” Boryna went on to say, “we have our rights,
and no one respects them: the forest is ours, and they cut it
down! What, then, are we to do, we who are bereft of all
help? For none in the world will do us justice. None!—Dear
people, Christians, Poles, I tell you that there is now
naught to be done save this one thing: defend by ourselves
that which is our own property; go in a body, and forbid
them to hew our forest down.—All! One and all! let us go,
we, the inhabitants of Lipka—all save the cripples!—And,
good friends, fear ye nothing: we have for us our rights,
our will to assert them, and the justice of our cause. And,
moreover, they cannot send a whole village to prison.—So
come with me, men; be strong and courageous; come with
me—to the forest!” he shouted in a voice of thunder.</p>

<p class="c004">“To the forest!” they all roared in reply. The crowd
broke up, and every man ran home shouting. There was
an interval of confused preparation, while they made ready:
horses neighed, children screamed, men swore, women bewailed
themselves; but in a very short time, all were on
their way to the poplar road, where Boryna, in his sledge,
was waiting, together with Ploshka, Klemba and the other
foremost men in Lipka.</p>

<p class="c004">All fell into line as they came—peasant-owners, labourers,
and even a few women and youngsters: some in sledges,
some on horseback, some in carts; but the rest (nearly all
the village) trudged on foot, forming a dense mass, like a
long field of waving rustling corn, with the women’s red
garments for poppies, and, for the awns, bristling with good
stout stakes and rusty pitchforks, with here and there a
scythe, flashing brightly. The folk went out as if to reap—but
not now with gay laughter and merry jokes. They
stood silent, grim, relentless, ready for any encounter. And
presently Boryna got into his sledge, eyed the people once
more, and made the sign of the cross:</p>

<p class="c004">“In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Amen!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Amen, amen!” they repeated.—At that moment, they
heard a tinkling bell, telling them that the priest had just
<span class="pageno" id="Page_274">274</span>begun mass. They crossed themselves, took off their caps,
smote their breasts, some of them uttering a pious sigh, as
they marched on in regular formation, strong silent men—almost
all Lipka. But the blacksmith had slunk away somewhere
amongst the hedges, and, creeping back to his hut,
leaped on to his horse to take a straight cut to the manor.
As for Antek, who had, ever since his father appeared, withdrawn
into the tavern, he procured a gun from Yankel,
and as soon as the march began, hid it beneath his sheepskin,
and made direct for the woods through the fields,
without so much as casting a glance at the men of Lipka.</p>

<p class="c004">These were following Boryna as fast as they could: he
drove foremost of all.</p>

<p class="c004">After him came the Ploshka families, who dwelt in three
separate cabins, and Staho was their leader: a weakly-looking
crew, but loud of tongue, and noisy, and self-assured.</p>

<p class="c004">Then all the Soha kinsmen, led on by Simon the Soltys.</p>

<p class="c004">The Vahnik tribe marched next—short thin fellows all
of them, but fierce as hornets.</p>

<p class="c004">In the fourth line walked the Golombs, with Matthew at
their head: few in number, but such stalwart men and
plucky fighters, they were as good as half a village.</p>

<p class="c004">The Sikora family came next: thickset as tree-stumps,
and sturdy men, but great grumblers.</p>

<p class="c004">Klemba’s kin now advanced, and a host of striplings with
them: tall young men, always fond of squabbles.—Over
them was Gregory, brother to the Voyt.</p>

<p class="c004">And many another, too, brought up the rear, whose names
were too many to mention.</p>

<p class="c004">Under their ponderous tread, the earth shook. The
troop went forward, with dark and ominous faces; like a
hail-cloud, bearing thunderbolts in its womb, showing a
flash now and then, and, when it bursts, destroying all beneath
it.</p>

<p class="c004">So they passed out; and then, how great was the lamentation
of those left behind them at home!</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_275">275</span>The forest was standing, as yet torpid after the cold of
the night, full of a drowsy stupor, and swathed in a mist
of clotted opaqueness.</p>

<p class="c004">The woodland lay quiet, immersed in frost. The dawn
reddened the tree-tops faintly, and fell here and there in
streaks over the pallid snows below.</p>

<p class="c004">But, in Vilche Doly, there were heard, again and yet again,
the thundering sound of falling trees, the clipping strokes
of the axes, the harsh rough throbbing of the saws.</p>

<p class="c004">They were felling the forest!</p>

<p class="c004">Over forty men, hard at work, like a flock of woodpeckers,
were assailing the trees, hacking at them with persistent
fury. These fell, one after another, and the open space
grew wider, as the fallen giants lay humbled to the ground,
in longer and longer rows. Only in some places did a
slender stripling, spared for seedlings, rise up in the midst of
this desolation, as a tall thistle lifts its head over the lonely
plain. But it seemed to stoop and mourn pitifully for its
slain brothers.—The brushwood, too, that had been left untouched,
and a few stunted trees which the ax had not
deigned to sacrifice, also looked as though weeping over the
dead. All round, upon the sheets of trampled snow, as if
laid out to be wrapped in their shrouds, stiff and stark lay
the murdered trees, and the heaps which had been their
limbs, and the lopped crowns of the mighty trunks stripped
of their boughs, like mangled mutilated corpses: while
streams of yellow sawdust—the blood of the slaughtered
forest, as it were—were sinking into the snow.</p>

<p class="c004">In a circle about the cleared space, like men standing
around an open grave, towered the thick unbroken forest,
multitudinous and lofty, as friends and kinsmen might stand
around, drooping, sorrowful, with muffled sighs, listening to
the thudding falls, and gazing in dull bewilderment at this
harvest reaped by inexorable Fate!</p>

<p class="c004">With never a pause, the wood-cutters went onward.
Slowly, in one long line, they worked their way into the
wood, which barred the way with its seemingly indestructible
wall of close-set trunks. Its immensity swallowed them
<span class="pageno" id="Page_276">276</span>up; they were lost in the shade of its branches; but their
axes glittered through the gloom, and they hacked away
tirelessly, and the stridulous uninterrupted rasping of the
saws went on. Every now and then a tree would totter,
and suddenly—like a bird caught in a snare—fall apart
from its fellows and, tossing its arm wildly, crash down to
the earth with a death-cry. And so another would fall, and
a score, and scores upon scores!</p>

<p class="c004">There fell enormous pine-trees, green with the moss of
age; and firs, arrayed in their dark verdure, and spruces
with their many outspread arms; oak-trees, too, fell, with
dry russet leaves still upon them, and overgrown with gray
lichens as with beards—ancients of the forest that the
thunderbolt would not blast, and the lapses of centuries had
failed to crumble, now succumbed to the ax! And of other
and meaner trees, who can say which and how many were
laid low?</p>

<p class="c004">Groaning, the forest was slowly giving up its life as the
trees fell: though these were like brave men in a battle,
who, packed close and propped up one by another, fall little
by little, giving way only to resistless might, and without
a cry topple over into the jaws of death by whole ranks at
a time.</p>

<p class="c004">Dull moans rose up; the earth vibrated continuously
under the impact of felled trees; the axes went on smiting,
the saws sawed without ceasing, while the whistling of the
boughs, rushing athwart the air, pierced the ears like dying
gasps.</p>

<p class="c004">So the work continued, hour after hour, with fresh booty
won from the wood; the glade was all strewn with trunks,
and the ax and saw were successful.</p>

<p class="c004">A few magpies perched and screamed upon the young
trees spared for seedlings; a flock of crows would sometimes
fly with harsh croaks over the field of death. Or else
a roebuck would peer out from some thicket and, looking
forth, gaze with bright eyes at the plumes of smoke wafted
upwards from the fires in the clearing and at the down-crashing
<span class="pageno" id="Page_277">277</span>trees; but when it saw men there, it fled with a
bleating cry.</p>

<p class="c004">The men hewed and sawed, like wolves that have cornered
a flock of sheep, which—huddled close, stupefied with
fear, and bleating pitifully—await the moment when the
throat of the last of them shall be torn out.</p>

<p class="c004">It was only after their breakfast, when the sun had risen
so high that the hoarfrost began to melt, and a few shafts
of golden light penetrated the woodlands—only then did
a far-off hubbub come to their ears.</p>

<p class="c004">“There are people coming this way, and in numbers,”
someone said, putting his ear to a trunk.</p>

<p class="c004">The sound came nearer and nearer. Soon they could
make out shouts and the dull trampling of many feet.
About the space of an Ave Maria later, a sledge appeared
on the way that led from the village. It entered the clearing
at once. Boryna was standing up in it; and in his rear—on
horseback, on foot, and in wagons—a great crowd of
men, women and youngsters came dashing forward with a
cry, to attack the wood-cutters.</p>

<p class="c004">Leaping down, Boryna ran forward at their head; all the
others pressed close behind him, armed with their various
weapons—brandishing pitchforks, flashing scythes, wielding
flails with brawny arms. Some had only a branch to fight
with, and the women less still—only their nails and their
invectives!—And down they all swooped upon the affrighted
wood-cutters.</p>

<p class="c004">“Away from the forest! ’Tis ours: ye shall not fell it!”
they shouted all at the same time, and no man could make
out what they wanted. But Boryna came up to the men,
and called out in a voice like a trumpet:</p>

<p class="c004">“Men of Modlitsa, of Rzepki, and whencesoever ye come
from: listen!”</p>

<p class="c004">There was a pause, and then he cried out:</p>

<p class="c004">“Take your belongings and tools, and go hence, and God
be with you!—We forbid you to cut down our forest; and
he that shall not obey will find us all ready to make him!”</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_278">278</span>No one opposed: the sight of that furious crowd, grim-visaged,
with flails and pitchforks and scythes, overawed
them. They cried to one another to give over, thrust their
axes into their girdles, and pressed together—an angry muttering
throng. The men of Rzepki especially, being of
gentle blood, and having been besides for centuries at feud
with their neighbours of Lipka, could not refrain from
cursing aloud, shaking their axes, with promises of vengeance.
But, however unwillingly, they yielded to superior
force, while the Lipka folk followed them to the edge of
the forest, threatening and shouting.</p>

<p class="c004">Others ran meantime about the clearing to put out the
fires and throw down the piles of timber which had begun
to rise; the women (Kozlova leading them), having seen at
the edge of the clearing several boarded huts which had been
set up, hastened to tear them down, and cast them about
the woodland, that nothing of them might remain.</p>

<p class="c004">The woodmen having been so easily put to flight, Boryna
called the farmers round him, urging them to come with
him to the Squire and warn him against laying a finger on
the forest until the law-courts should have decided what
was to belong to the peasants. But ere they had settled
what they should say, shrill screams were heard, and the
women came fleeing away in great haste. Hard on a score
of horsemen had entered on the scene, and were riding them
down.</p>

<p class="c004">Notice had been given to the manor, which had accordingly
at once dispatched these men to protect the wood-cutters.</p>

<p class="c004">The steward was riding at the head of a lot of farm-servants.
They made straight for the clearing and, falling
upon the women whom they met first, set to horsewhipping
them soundly. The steward, a burly wild-ox sort of man,
rode first at them, shouting:</p>

<p class="c004">“Ah, the thieves, the lousy thieves! Thrash ’em!
Bind ’em! To jail with ’em!”</p>

<p class="c004">“Rally, rally round me, boys! Stand up to them!”
<span class="pageno" id="Page_279">279</span>roared Boryna. His men, panic-stricken, had begun to
run; but at the sound of his voice they flew to his side,
protecting their heads with their arms as they ran.</p>

<p class="c004">“Cudgel those sons of dogs, and keep your flails for the
horses!” Boryna commanded, and, wild with fury, snatching
up a stake at hand, rushed forward, striking hard and
aiming well. And after him, like a wood shaken by some
angry blast, the peasants charged on in close order, pitchforks
and flails almost touching, and uttered a terrible cry
as they dashed in amongst the manor servants; they smote
and lunged boldly, and their flails rattled and clattered as
handfuls of peas flung down on a wooden flooring.</p>

<p class="c004">A horrible uproar arose, with fearful oaths, and the
whinnying of belaboured horses, and the groans of wounded
men, and the hoarse noises of the struggling, and the battle-cries!</p>

<p class="c004">The manor people held out stoutly, with imprecations
and blows as vigorous as those of the peasants; but at last
they were forced back in confusion: under the strokes of
the flails, the horses reared, squealing shrilly with pain, and
fled with their riders. The steward, perceiving this, made
his horse stand upright, broke into the mass of Boryna’s
men, and made for their leader. But this was his last
effort: a score of flail-strokes were aimed at him, as many
foes closed upon him instantly, and as many hands seized
him, pulling him off his horse. Tossed like a bush that a
spade has uprooted, he flew into the air, to come down on
the snow at their feet, insensible. With difficulty Boryna
protected him, and dragged him off into a place of safety.</p>

<p class="c004">All then became a whirling mass of men; the tumult
was ear-splitting, and the eddying mingled throng so dense
that nothing could be made out, save tangled groups of
fighters, rolling in the snow—fists lifted and falling in passionate
exasperation—and sometimes one or another would
burst from the scrimmage and run madly away for a few
yards—only to run back to the fight again, shouting and
raging as before.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_280">280</span>There were hand-to-hand fights, there were mass attacks;
men were seized by the throat or by the hair of the head,
and they tore at each other like wild beasts. Yet neither
could get the upper hand. The manor servants, having
alighted from their horses, gave ground no longer; the woodmen,
besides, now came to their help with sturdy assistance:
the men of Rzepki especially were foremost, rushing to their
rescue in silence, like savage dogs that only bite. Moreover,
the leader of them all was now the forester, who had
but just arrived: a man of gigantic size, who dearly loved
a fight, and had, besides, many a bone to pick with the
Lipka folk. He darted onward, fighting alone against multitudes,
cracking their skulls with the butt of his gun, and
making them fly on every side: a scourge to them all, and
a terror.</p>

<p class="c004">Staho Ploshka stood firm to stay his advance, for the
people was already beginning to flee before him; but, seized
by the throat, whirled in air, and dashed down like a sheaf
of threshed corn, he remained unconscious on the ground.—One
of the Vahniks then leaped forward and brought down
his flail on the giant’s shoulder with a smashing blow—only
to get such a hit between the eyes that he called out,
“Jesus!” and, opening his arms wide, fell stunned.</p>

<p class="c004">Now could Matthew bear it no longer, and came up to
attack him. Yet, although in physical strength not inferior
to Antek, he could not withstand the forester for a minute.
This one was far the stronger, and beat him, and rolled him
in the snow, and forced him to take to his heels: after which,
he made for Boryna. But, ere he could reach him, he was
assailed by a host of women, who flung themselves on him
with shrieks, clawed his face, pulled out his hair by handfuls,
and, piling themselves one upon the other, bore him
to the earth along with them: like a lot of curs attacking
a shepherd’s dog, plunging their fangs in his flesh, and
dragging him this way and that way.</p>

<p class="c004">Thenceforth did the Lipka folk begin to have the upper
hand. Both parties were in close conflict, mingled like fallen
<span class="pageno" id="Page_281">281</span>leaves; and each man chose his opponent, throttling and
lugging him through the snow: while the women hung on
the flanks of the battle, and tore at the enemies’ hair.</p>

<p class="c004">And now the confusion was such that one could scarcely
distinguish friend from foe.... In the end, the manor
servants were beaten completely. Some lay bleeding; some,
sorely bruised and exhausted, made off through the forest.
Only the woodmen defended themselves to the uttermost;
for certain amongst them had begged for mercy, which the
people, still more exasperated against them than against
those from the manor, and inflamed with anger as a resin-torch
burning in a gale, were but little disposed to grant,
and thrashed them most unmercifully.</p>

<p class="c004">Sticks and flails and pitchforks were now thrown aside,
and they wrestled together, man to man, fist to fist, brute
strength pitted against brute strength; crushing, tearing,
wallowing on the ground! And there was no longer any
noise of cries, but only low groans, curses, and the panting
of the stubborn fight.</p>

<p class="c004">A tremendous day it was, a day of wrath.</p>

<p class="c004">The people seemed to have lost their heads, so greatly
were they all infuriated by conflict. Kobus in particular,
and Kozlova, looked like demented creatures, horrible to
see, covered with blood and bruises, yet still attacking
any number of enemies single-handed.</p>

<p class="c004">So the men of Lipka now set up a mighty cry, and rushed
together to assault those who still resisted, one of them now
putting to flight ten enemies, and following on the heels
of those who fled.—Just then the forester, who had by
now freed himself from the women’s attack, but was very
sore and all the more furious, shouted to rally his men. At
the same instant, perceiving Boryna, he flew at him! Each
grappled the other with a formidable hug, like two bears
at odds, pushing, swaying, striking one another against the
trees of the forest, at the verge of which they had
arrived....</p>

<p class="c004">It was then that Antek came up; he had been much
<span class="pageno" id="Page_282">282</span>delayed on his way, though he had hurried so that he was
forced to rest awhile to take breath, and also to see how
things fared with his father.</p>

<p class="c004">The forester had the advantage. True, it was no easy
matter, for he was much exhausted, and the old man fought
a good fight. Again and again, both fell down, and rolled
about like rival dogs, and bruised each other on the ground.
But Boryna now was more and more frequently undermost;
his cap had fallen off, and his white head was again and
again battered against the gnarled roots of the trees.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek glanced round a second time, drew the gun from
under his sheepskin, crouched down to take aim, and—crossing
himself mechanically!—levelled the weapon at his
father’s head! But before he could pull the trigger, both
combatants had risen to their feet, Antek rose likewise, and
his barrel pointed straight at his father.... But no shot
came.—A sense of unspeakable horror had entered his heart:
he could hardly draw breath for the pain of it. His hands
shook as with an ague; all his body trembled; a mist veiled
his eyes. Then, suddenly, a short piercing shriek burst
forth.</p>

<p class="c004">“Killed! I’m killed!”</p>

<p class="c004">The forester had just clubbed Boryna with his gunstock.
The blood spurted; the old man threw up his arms and fell
headlong to the ground.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek, flinging his gun away, sprang to his father’s side,
whose breath rattled in his throat. The skull was terribly
injured; he still was alive, but his eyes stared glassily, and
his feet moved with continuous jerks.</p>

<p class="c004">“My father! O Jesus! my father!” he exclaimed at the
top of his voice. Taking up the insensible body, he pressed
it to his bosom, and cried again, in tones of despair:</p>

<p class="c004">“My father! they have slain him ... slain him!” And
his voice was the howl of a wild beast that has lost her
cubs.</p>

<p class="c004">Several men who were close by came to Boryna’s aid,
placed him upon a litter of boughs, applied snow to his
wounded head, and assisted him to the best of their knowledge.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_283">283</span>Antek had sat down on the ground, tearing his hair
and crying out as one mad:</p>

<p class="c004">“They have killed him ... killed him!” till the folk
began to think him really distracted.</p>

<p class="c004">Suddenly he stopped.—All came upon him in a flash: he
at once darted upon the forester with such a shriek of rage,
with such a rabid glare in his eyes, that the latter trembled
and would have fled. Soon aware, however, that flight could
not save him, he turned and fired, so close that Antek’s face
was blackened with powder. By some miracle, he missed—and
the avenger was on him like a thunderbolt.</p>

<p class="c004">Resistance, attempts to escape, prayers for mercy forced
from him by despair and fear of death, were all in vain.
Antek’s clutch was the grip of a maddened wolf. He
throttled him till the gristle of his windpipe cracked, then
whirling him on high, thrashed a tree with his body until
the breath was quite beaten out of it.</p>

<p class="c004">Then he began to fight the others. Wherever he appeared,
all fled before him terrified: so fearful was he to behold,
smeared with his father’s blood and with his own, bareheaded,
with matted hair, livid as a corpse—a portentous
monster of superhuman strength! Almost by himself, he
struck down and put to flight such as yet resisted; and, in
the end, they were forced to calm him and hold him back, or
he would have beaten all the hostile party to death.</p>

<p class="c004">All was over. Those of Lipka, though bleeding from
many a wound, now filled the wood with triumphant cries.</p>

<p class="c004">The women tended the more grievously wounded, and
placed them on sledges. They were not a few. One of
Klemba’s sons had a broken arm; Andrew Paches’ leg, too,
was broken; he could not walk, and screamed as they bore
him off. Kobus was unable to move for the blows he had
got; Matthew was spitting blood, and his loins hurt him
exceedingly. Others also were in as evil plight almost.
Scarcely one had come unscathed out of the encounter; but—they
were victorious! So, caring no whit for their wounds,
they set up joyful deafening shouts as they prepared to
return.</p>

<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_284">284</span>Boryna was lifted into his sledge, and driven slowly, for
fear he should die on the road. He remained unconscious:
gore oozed from under the bandages, falling into his eyes
and running down his cheeks, which were white as a dead
man’s.</p>

<p class="c004">Antek walked beside the sledge, gazing on his father with
eyes full of dismay. When the ground was rough, he held
his head up gently; from time to time he would murmur
low, in a tone of infinite sorrow:</p>

<p class="c004">“My father! O God! my father!”</p>

<p class="c004">The folk went home as best they could, in disorderly
groups of threes and fours, among the trees, for the roadway
was taken up by the sledges. Now and then a deep
groan was heard; but most of them laughed boisterously,
with merry shouts. And they talked and talked, relating
episodes of the fight, priding themselves on their victory,
and deriding the vanquished. Songs, too, and deafening
whoops reverberated through the woodland. They were all
intoxicated with victory, and more than one staggered along,
stumbling over roots or jostling the trunks of trees.</p>

<p class="c004">Blows and fatigue were all forgotten; their hearts, elated
with the ineffable glory of success, swelled with enthusiasm,
and felt the force to withstand the whole world, if it opposed.
Nay! get the better of it, too!</p>

<p class="c004">On they trooped in noisy bands, with flashing glances at
the forest—theirs by right of conquest!—And it waved above
them and rustled and shed on their heads its dew of
melted frost, as if it were weeping over them.</p>

<p class="c004">Suddenly Boryna opened his eyes, gazing long at Antek,
and seemingly unable to believe his senses. Then a deep
calm joy overspread his features; twice he opened his mouth
to speak, and at last with a great effort succeeded in
whispering:</p>

<p class="c004">“Is it you, son? is it you?”</p>

<p class="c004">And he relapsed into lethargy.</p>

<div class="footnote" id="f3">
<p class="c004"><a href="#r3" class="pginternal">3</a>. Over the potato-pits, dug deep as a protection from the cold,
mounds are raised to protect them still more effectively.—<i>Translator’s
Note.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f4">
<p class="c004"><a href="#r4" class="pginternal">4</a>. In view of the bargaining that ensues, this must be counted as
45 roubles.—<i>Translator’s Note.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f5">
<p class="c004"><a href="#r5" class="pginternal">5</a>. This is the instrument used to make the Altar-breads (or Communion
Breads well known outside the Catholic pale, but much
thicker; the Catholic Altar-breads are semi-transparent).—In
Poland, the organist goes round the parish at Christmas-time, offering
packets of these breads with his good wishes, and receiving
such gifts as may be offered to him. This practice naturally entails
some contempt towards him on the part of peasants.—<i>Translator’s
Note.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f6">
<p class="c004"><a href="#r6" class="pginternal">6</a>. <i>Our</i> here means only, of course, “that part of the forest on which
we claim to have a right to cut wood for fuel, and which the Squire
cannot sell without our permission.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f7">
<p class="c004"><a href="#r7" class="pginternal">7</a>. A town close to which stands a monastery on a high hill, with
the stations of the Way of the Cross, made in imitation of those
in Jerusalem. After Chenstohova, this is the greatest place of pilgrimage
in Poland.—<i>Translator’s Note.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f8">
<p class="c004"><a href="#r8" class="pginternal">8</a>. Compare this anatomical error with what Falstaff says, “Henry
IV,” Part 2, Act IV, Sc. 3.—<i>Translator’s Note.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f9">
<p class="c004"><a href="#r9" class="pginternal">9</a>. Peasants form two classes: the <i>gospodarze</i>, or landowners, who
have at least a hut and enclosure of their own; and <i>komorniki</i>, or
lodgers, who must work even for the lodgings they occupy. These
are very poor, and looked down upon by the others.—<i>Translator’s
Note.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f10">
<p class="c004"><a href="#r10" class="pginternal">10</a>. Here and there in Poland, one finds villages whose inhabitants
hold aloof from the other peasants, and keep strictly to themselves;
types very different from the others; haughty, reserved, and generally
very poor. In old days, their forefathers were ennobled and
grants of land were made to them for distinguished military service;
and these are the remnants of their posterity.—<i>Translator’s Note.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f11">
<p class="c004"><a href="#r11" class="pginternal">11</a>. <i>Kolendy.</i> An annual ceremony of blessing the house and farm
and the live stock.—<i>Translator’s Note.</i></p>